intro 

good evening. leading the news today, businessman albert hakim told the iran-contra hearings that he put money aside for col. oliver north's children. the independent counsel lawrence walsh asked the committees not to grant immunity to col. north. new york congressman mario biaggi and six others were indicted in the wedtech investigation. the author of the sullivan code governing u.s. business in south africa advised american companies to pull out. we'll have details in our news summary in a moment. jim? 

after the news summary, the testimony of assistant secretary of state elliott abrams and albert hakim before the iran-contra hearings, with reactions and analysis from senators inouye and rudman, the senate committees' chairman and vice chairman. and a newsmaker interview about aids with world health organization official, dr. jonathan mann. news summary 

albert hakim, the iranian-born banker for the iran-contra operations, testified today that $ 200,000 in profits from iran arms sales was set aside for oliver north's children. hakim managed the swiss bank accounts for the arms sales contra supply operation, managed by lt. col. north from the national security council. he said he put aside the money for the university education of north's children, but did not tell north about it.

i came up with the idea that ollie had to be assured and i started out by putting this money aside as death benefit for him, and i had also learned through scattered discussions that ollie was not spending time at home and he was not attending to his family, to his kids' education, and so forth. and i had become emotionally very attached to ollie -- still am, really love this man -- i figured that the interest on $ 200,000 could cover a good part of a child's university education. 

hakim also said he was told president reagan personally approved his activities. the previous witness, assistant secretary of state elliott abrams said he still enjoyed the confidence of secretary of state george schultz. democratic members of the investigating committees said abrams would be forced to resign for misleading the congress. jim? 

the iran-contra independent counsel asked the select committees today not to grant immunity to oliver north. lawrence walsh met with the house and senate committee members at lunchtime. afterward, he explained his reasons for opposing immunity for the national security aide, and key figure in the iran-contra affair. 

our reasons for asking for it were, one, that col. north is a central figure in the activities that are under investigation. second, that there are now many witnesses who have been giving testimony to his activity. and therefore, it may be that by the time the committee is through with the testimony of admiral poindexter, they would not need the additional testimony of col. north. 

the senate committee's leader said a decision on north's immunity will be made within 48 hours. the republican vice chairman, senator warren rudman, said the committee could not complete its work without talking to north. north himself made an appearance in federal court in washington this afternoon. inside the courtroom, his attorneys asked that the independent counsel's investigation of him be stopped on grounds that the law creating the 

the government of iraq is insisting that the uss stark was inside a war zone when it was accidentally attacked by one of their planes. a pentagon report today said the u.s. has challenged that claim, saying the navy has numerous fixes showing the stark was well outside the war zone. the report said the iraqi claim was the principal difference that has persisted in the joint u.s.-iraqi investigation of the attack, which cost the lives of 37 u.s. sailors. 

a new york congressman was indicted today on racketeering charges. democrat mario biaggi was accused of participating in turning the wedtech corporation of new york into a racketeering enterprise. wedtech is a government contractor, already the target of other investigations involving allegations against attorney general edwin meese, among others. today's charge alleges biaggi, his son and five others used wedtech as a vehicle for making illegal payments to public officials. biaggi and a prosecutor each talked to the press about today's indictment. 

these charges raise serious questions about the way we practice politics and conduct business in the city, state and nation. i must emphasize from the outset this investigation is continuing. it has not been completed, and there is much more that is still under investigation, there's much more to go. 

i will fight this indictment because i am innocent. i want to prove that. after months of trying this case in the media, the prosecution has finally come forth with an indictment. the prosecutors refused my offer to submit to their lie detector test, despite the fact that i earlier had passed one on the key issues which were involved in the investigation. 

a u.s. foreign service officer has been indicted on charges of selling false u.s. entry visas to iranians. the 21-count indictment was announced today in washington, following the arrest of the officer, bernard fennell, a 19-year state department veteran. he allegedly participated in a scheme with six others to sell the visas while he was the first secretary and counsel at the u.s. embassy in madrid, spain. 

the reverend leon sullivan, who devised the code of conduct widely used by american business in south africa, called on all u.s. companies to pull out in nine months. in a washington statement, the philadelphia minister also called on the u.s. government to break off diplomatic relations and enact economic embargo of south africa. sullivan said he no longer saw any hope that his policies would change apartheid. 

as of may, 1985, i stated it had been 24 months statutory apartheid was not ended. there was not a clear commitment of the vote for blacks equal to whites. i would call on the companies to leave south africa and call for an american embargo. the conditions have not been remotely met, nor has there been progress in that direction. 

canada's political leaders reached agreement today on a formula to bring french-speaking quebec into line with the new canadian constitution. the agreement was reached in an all-night session between prime minister brian mulroney, and the premiers of canada's ten provinces. quebec, which has 1/4 of canada's population, refused to sign the new constitution six years ago, because it was not recognized as a distinct society within canada. the new formula satisfies that demand, but has been widely criticized and must still be ratified by federal and provincial parliaments. at one point in the 1970s, quebec separatists wanted to break away from canada to form a separate nation. 

president reagan flew off to italy today. he will spend five days at a villa outside venice, preparing for the economic summit, which begins monday. mr. reagan spoke briefly at a white house departure ceremony, saying it was time to end trade and monetary imbalances among the world industrial democracies. he also said we must work to eliminate inequities in the international trade environment. 

some 78,000 farmers, threatened with possible foreclosure, got a reprieve today. in bismarck, north dakota, u.s. district judge, bruce van sickle, ordered the federal farmers home administration to halt proceedings to collect overdue loans in order to inform farmers of their rights. the judge ruled recently that the agency had used illegal notices to inform the borrowers of possible foreclosure proceedings. 

andres segovia is dead. the world' premier classical guitarist died last night of heart failure in madrid, spain. he was 94 years old. and that's it for the news summary tonight. now the testimony of elliott abrams and albert hakim, senators inouye and rudman, and the head of the world health organization's aids program. iran-contra hearings 

our special coverage of the irna-contra hearings is where we begin again tonight. the witnesses today were assistant secretary of state elliott abrams and businessman albert hakim. the reporter, as usual, is judy woodruff. judy? 

the morning session of today's hearing turned into an opportunity for one member of the committee after another to take shots as assistant secretary abrams, primarily for his misleading congress in testimony last year. but also for what they viewed as his distancing himself from possibly illegal activities on behalf of the nicaraguan contras. one of the most contentious exchanges came early in the day, when republican senator william cohen zeroed in on what he saw as a discrepancy in abrams' account of his instructions to retired army general john singlaub regarding singlaub's solicitation of the governments of taiwan and south korea for aid to the contras. 

-- to the tower board when they asked you about singlaub's efforts to solicit funds from countries no. 3 and 5, you said, "i said, 'i can't do that. it's just not right. i can't do that.'" do you recall that testimony? 

mmmm hmmm. 

the problem i have with that categorical statement once again, "it's just not right," is that the implication is that it's some sort of moral balance going on -- what is right and what is wrong. "it's not right for general singlaub to get this nod from me -- it's just not right." that in fact doesn't comport with what all the documents that were being furnished to you by your direct subordinate, mr. melton, seemed to indicate. what they indicate is that the timing wasn't right. "tell singlaub the timing is wrong. that he is in danger of jeopardizing this sophisticated strategy that we have to getting the president's program through the congress." 

have you read the mr. melton's deposition, sir? 

i've read all the documents that were submitted to you -- 

well, senator, he's been deposed by this committee. he has stated in full under oath his view of all of that, and i think it's a little bit unfair, frankly. but i can tell you i've read it, because the committee was kind enough to make it available to me. i think you'll find when you read it that mr. melton, not knowing what i testified, under oath, a career foreign service officer, has a little bit of a different recollection of it, in which his recollection really is -- as was mine -- that we were really saying to general singlaub -- a man for whom i have and have always had the utmost respect and admiration -- that we were not going to say to him, "would you please go away, we're not going to help you with this," but we were going to kind of try to let him down easily, because i was actually sorry that there was nothing that i could do to help him. but i felt that was nothing i could do to help him. i think that your interpretation is not that of mr. melton, who was a career officer who attended all those meetings, and who was the usual contact with general singlaub. 

then all of those memos coming to you from mr. melton were in error then? 

no, sir, they were not all in error. mr. melton said in his depositions that the line in which he said there was a previous deposition -- 

i didn't say (unintelligible). can we move back to the issue of the miami herald, when you complained to mr. abramowitz that someone in his department was leaking information. you commented on this yesterday. the april 30 miami herald piece. the question i have is did you ever call oliver north concerning this story? 

i don't believe so. 

why didn't you call oliver north after the secretary had asked you to monitor his activities? here was a direct allegation that he was acting in violation of the law, and you not once called oliver north to say, "is there any truth to this story in the miami herald?" 

ido not believe -- let me just read you something here if i could. my notes of september 4, 1985, of a meeting with the secretary. 1) monitor ollie. 2) report to secretary on the effectiveness of the contras. 3) diplomatic track -- very important. keep alive. 4) economic aid -- boom everywhere but nicaragua. look at our economic resources. get more mileage out of them. a sense of momentum. private investment. economic development. 

"monitor ollie" is one line in a very large book. it was not what i was supposed to do first thing every morning. i did in fact, with respect to illegal activities, as i testified yesterday, ask him about whether he was doing anything violative of the law, and i dealt with him pretty regularly. what concerned me about this was that it was not the first time that i had read about or heard about intelligence officers of the department talking to the press in this way -- which ehy aren't supposed to do. that was my concern for that morning. "monitor ollie" is not an activity that is to be conducted on a 45-hour a week basis. 

but if there were rumors being circulated on a 48-hour-weekly basis about his activities, you didn't feel compelled at least to determine what exactly he was doing? 

i was in pretty regular contact with him. and for all i know, i did ask him about that. i have no memory of asking him about that. and my concern was -- first of all, the secretary did not say to me, "monitor your deputies and monitor your ambassadors," but that was my real job. because i'm a state department officer. i don't supervise the activities of nsc officials. and my concern here was what looked to me like an untoward act by somebody supervised in my building. 

i want to tell you that all of this -- unfortunate as it may be -- is going to make it very difficult, it seems to me, to have some kind of cooperation or understanding or capability in working with the congress on driving the policy -- if you indeed now are, and still are, charged primarily with driving the policy on contra assistance. 

well, i chair the inter-agency group, and i think i would characterize it that way. 

well, it's more than just chairing the group, mr. secretary. you're going to have to come on the hill and work with all the committees of congress if the administration's program is going to have a prayer of a chance. and i detect no effort for strong bipartisan support. i see where we are hung up with all of this question about your involvement, everybody else's involvement, the nsc and the cia and the state department and the policy issues, and we expect blithely to roll up here in september and ask the senate and the house to support a program which has some merit in my judgment, but is extremely debatable by a great number of people both in the congress and outside of the congress. 

well, mr. chairman, let me just say first of all, we made a decision some months ago not to go to the congress until this phase of the hearings were over and we could assess what information had come out. a lot of information has come out of these hearings and out of the depositions connected with it -- which is very new to us, the state department. but secondly, i just want to say that while we all go through this, you're still chairing that committee, i'm still assistant secretary. we're still conducting business, we're still doing the work not only with respect to this policy, but the rest of latin america. ambassador habib and i the day before we started, had a lengthy meeting about his trip, starting saturday, his next trip down to latin american through central america to the four democracies, on the question of keeping the negotiating track going. so the policy still continues to be implemented while we do this. 

well, i can't speak for you, but i can certainly speak for myself. okay? i have a great many reservations about how this policy is being driven and will be driven in the next several months. even though i still support aid to the contras, for the lack of better policy, to accomplish what it is we're trying to do -- which is to keep the communists from getting a foothold in central america. but i am not convinced that without broad bipartisan and public support and support in the congress that you're going to be able to accomplish it. what we've done is -- it seems to me -- in this whole effort -- i'm talking about the whole ball of wax, now, that we've been talking about throughout these hearings, has almost destroyed the contras. 

well, i share that fear, mr. chairman. and i hope it's wrong. 

do you think that you personally are in a position to take a leadership role in rebuilding the kind of trust -- and someone in your position must be a leader in this effort -- between the congress when it has been clear before the foreign relations committee, before the intelligence committee, before the american people on national television, that the wrong impression has been created by you? and that even the apology which was wrought from you -- or wrung out of you -- before the intelligence committee was not one that you felt so strongly about that the minute you stepped through the door it was so much on your heart you had to render that apology before the meeting ever got started? do you think that you can play a constructive role in the future to rebuild a relationship of trust, given what has gone on in the part? 

i do, senator. i think perhaps more importantly the secretary does. but i do. and i think that -- i cannot promise you i'll never be misled, and i cannot promise you i'll never be wrong. i'll be wrong. but the answer to your question is "yes." 

i have to say to you -- and i'm sorry to say this -- that as one who feels very strongly that we must begin again from this point forward to rebuild a bipartisan foreign policy, particularly in central america, that we have to rebuild trust so that the congress and executive branch can work together to put our central american policy back together -- that i'm afraid there's too much on the record at this point for you to be able to effectively play that role. and i'm sorry to say that. but it's something that i strongly feel, and i hope you'll ponder it. 

well, thank you, senator. if you'll give me the privilege of replying -- i'm sorry you feel that way. and i hope that the briefings that i have given on about 10 occasions since then to the intelligence committee and its staff have revealed the fact that we are working together and will continue to work together. and i hope to continue to work together with congress. 

it seems obvious you took your job very seriously. i suspect you were probably even be impressed with the influence you're supposed to have -- would want to impress congress and the secretary of state and the president. 

i don't need to impress (unintelligible). 

-- with how well you carried out your duties. you did want to do a good job, didn't you? 

sure. 

well, i'm very troubled with the job that you did. because you would have us believe that you just had no idea about private fundraising, about solicitation to foreign governments for a few million dollars. you had no idea about how the contras were operating, or where they were getting their supplies. you have no idea about a large number of people who were commuting almost daily between the united states and your area of surveillance. and yet these missions went on for months while you were in office. now, mr. abrams -- 

well, i'd just take exception to that. i never said i had no idea aboot most of the things you said i said i had no idea bout. 

now, i understand that you haven't said you knew anything about them. you are the only man i ever saw that takes more pride in not knowing anything than anybody i ever saw. most people take pride and are smug about knowledge. 

well, i take exception -- 

you seem to be very proud of not knowing anything about the technical problems and the real sticky problems with which you are involved. now, i believe you'd have been a lot better informed if you'd been reading the daily newspapers, listening to tv, listening to the radio. and i can only conclude after this that you're either extremely incompetent, or that you are still as i say, deceiving us with semantics. or, three, maybe the administration has intentionally kept you in the dark on all these matters. so then you can come down and blatantly mislead us, the secretary of state and the american people on all of these issues we've been discussing. and i am deeply troubled by it and wonder if you can survive as assistant secretary of state. 

well, fortunately, mr. -- if i can respond to that, mr. brooks. 

(unintelligible) balance of my time, mr. chairman -- let him talk. 

thank you. fortunately, i guess i have to say i don't work for you, i work for george shultz, and he seems to be pretty satisfied with the job i've done for him. that makes me very happy and very proud. 

and me. 

the characterization that you have made of my testimony here yesterday and previous testimony, i think is in too many ways to state in a brief answer erroneous. 

i wouldn't think as you'd agree with one bit of it. 

now, i just suggest to you that i've appreciated your testimony. you've been forthright, and you've come forward here, and i heard your testimony in front of the intelligence committee as well. and i do understand some of the difficulties between answering everything and just spilling your guts before the committee or waiting until they ask the appropriate or right question. and i think there's a lot of that goes on, and i can't blame you, because of the loss of information that has occurred from those two committees -- the house and the senate, the intelligence committees over the last number of years. 

thank you, mr. chairman. 

for whatever reasons -- and i don't want to judge those reasons -- you did not ask the question that you should have asked about the private network. you looked the other way. you chose not to be informed about a key element of policy directly under your jurisdiction. now, let me try to conclude.we cannot advance united states interests if public officials who testify before the congress resort to legalisms and word games, claim ignorance about things they either know about, or should know about, and at critical points tell the congress things that are not true. i'm aware -- and i don't need to be reminded -- that the performance of the congress in all of this is not flawless. i happen to agree with your observation the other day that this humanitarian aid program that we've asked you to administer was simply unworkable. and neither you nor anybody else could administer it well. but i hope you recognize that the congress cannot play its constitutional role if it cannot trust the testimony of representatives of the president as truthful and fully informed. 

i would hope that future witnesses would take the statement made by chairman hamilton very seriously. because i don't think we can stand too many days such as this, listening to testimony which would question great heroes of ours. i don't know whether to believe you or general singlaub. to believe you or ambassador tambs. and it's not my job to decide whether you or the other one is honest. but someone is not being honest in this. 

after all the members had had a chance to say their piece, abrams said his. he read a closing statement, not so much in defense of his actions, but in defense of his beliefs. 

the challenge we face is great. a soviet effort to achieve domination of the region between the panama canal and mexico, which would constitute a change in the fundamental security situation our country has enjoyed since 1789. not only would the human rights and democratic aims of the '80s be lost at unspeakable human costs, but our ability to defend our neighborhood and to project power in the world would be irrevocably compromised. i pray we will be able to put aside our differences and our institutional biases and act as a great nation to help our friends and challenge our enemies and protect our freedom and security now, before the cost is so high that it is measured not in dollars, but in blood and in tears. thank you very much, mr. chairman. 

this afternoon, the committees heard from the long-awaited business partner of retired air force general richard secord, iranian-american businessman albert hakim. hakim's testimony had been postponed for more than a week, because committee staff said he produced so many new leads for them to follow up. [voice over] fifty-one-year-old albert hakim met general secord in iran in the mid 1970s when secord was head of the u.s. group advising the shah's air force. hakim was cultivating military contacts as an agent for european and american arms companies. after secord retired from the air force, he joined hakim's firm, stanford technology. they handled the sale of u.s. weapons to iran. and directed the air resupply to the nicaraguan contras. secord managed the operations end, while hakim managed the money and set up the network of shell companies and bank accounts used in the operation. in all, $ 38 million moved through hakim's accounts. according to secord, hakim still controls nearly $ 8 million in profits from the weapons deals. before he was questioned by chief house counsel john nields, hakim read an opening statement stating his belief that his involvement in the iran-contra network was on behalf of the president of the united states. 

i was told that our contra activities were being undertaken not only with approval by, but at the request of, the president of the united states. we were dealing directly with the white house staff. consequently, it never occurred to met as a private citizen, independently to investigate the legality of the president's policy. with respect to iran initiative, the same basic facts are also true. i intended to profit from my activities and i never made any pretense about that fact. moreover, i had the same assurances regarding the legality of our efforts, and i was told that the president of the united states had personally signed an order authorizing our activities. as a private businessman, and as a naturalized american citizen, devoted to this country, i considered it an honor to be called upon by the office of the president of the united states to render meaningful assistance to my country. 

nields took hakim through the many swiss bank accounts that he had established for the iran-contra network. but one account in particular was set up for personal reasons. 

now, the last account is the button account. it has $ 200,000 in it, and your records reflect that amount was put in a button account on may 20, 1986. 

actually, the complete name is belly button, and this was a name that i decided to use at a time because we laughed about a joke and simply took the name and used it for this set aside. 

does it refer to a person? 

i -- yes, it does. 

who? 

lt. col. north. 

now, can you explain the circumstances surrounding the setting up of an account for lt. col. north? 

i had become extremely fond of lt. col. north -- to me, he's an amazing person. i noticed something this man that -- he's got two loves. one is his country, to a point that in my mind the biggest satisfaction that can be given to him if he would enter into an environment that he could get killed for his country. i sensed that so many times. the other love that he has is his family. and especially during the time of the second [unintelligible], i witnessed him being torn apart between these two loves. but coming back to how this thing came about, i came up with the idea that ollie had to be assured, and started out with putting this money aside as death benefit for him. and i had also learned through scattered discussions -- it was not that there was one discussion that this issue was analyzed -- i had heard through various remarks -- that ollie was not spending time at home, and he was not attending to his family, to his kids' education, and so forth. and i had become emotionally very attached to ollie -- still am -- and really love this man. 

did you tell col. north that you'd set this money aside? 

i cannot recall having ever told col. north that i had set money aside for his family's benefit. but i do recall my reaction to the times that we were discussing his family problem, basically for not being able to attend to his family, and also his concern about the education of his kids and his concern what would happen if he should get killed, and so on. the way i remarked to him was, "ollie, you are part of the family. for as long as one is alive, you need worry about your family. 

did you ever take any steps to get some part of this money or any other money into his possession for his children's education? 

the answer is yes. i consulted mr. zucker andi gave him an iranian proverb. i told him i want to do this but the proverb is "if you want to fix an eyebrow, we don't want to blind the eye," meaning that i want to find a proper way of getting this money to his kid without compromising ollie's position or his family. the idea that we came up with was maybe we could arrange for a part time job for mrs. north and since we did not know what the qualifications of mrs. north were, we decided maybe if mrs. zucker could find someone that could offer that position to her, and even if she did not qualify we could make use of the button set aside to cover her salary. mr. zucker told me that he knew of a real estate developer that he was going to contact and see if he could find a way of approaching the problem that way. and that was the last time that we discussed about this issue, and to the best of my knowledge, no money was sent to north's family, and no proper solution was found. 

just so we understand, the idea of this real estate development company was to have that company pay mrs. north some kind of a salary and to have the button account pay the real estate company. 

that is correct. 

hakim said as far as he knows, the entire $ 200,000 set aside for north's family is still sitting in a bank earning interest. in other testimony, hakim said he became involved in the iranian-contra project both because of his love for his two countries, iran and the united states, and because of his desire to make a profit. hakim returns to the witness table tomorrow. robin? 

on several fronts, this has been a busier day than normal for the senior members of the select committee. for their perspective on today's events, we have with us the chairman and vice chairman of the senate committee, democrat daniel inouye of hawaii and republican warren rudman of new hampshire. they join us from the senate gallery. senator inouye, what is the significance of hakim's testimony about the fund for north's family? 

well, it's mind boggling, to say the least. if you can imagine the scenario where a total stranger calls up your wife and says, "my name is zucker. i'm representing a person who wants to remain anonymous. will you please join me at a law firm of such-and-such in philadelphia?" and she goes there. now any wife with any sort of relationship with her husband would first of all discuss this matter with her husband. and in this case, the husband would know who mr. zucker was. and so to suggest that if this scenario had been carried out that col. north wasn't aware of what was happening is asking for too much. 

does this suggest to you -- i don't want to put words or thoughts in your head -- but does it suggest to you that this investigation has taken a different turn because up until now the principals who were officials of the united states -- there's been no suggestion of any monetary gain in this? 

well, in the case of both of us sitting here, this did not come as a surprise, because we were made privy to the deposition. but as you pointed out, it does put a new twist to the whole thing. it's not a happy one. 

senator rudman, what about hakim's statement with which he began his testimony -- that he was told president reagan had approved -- and in one case signed -- an order authorizing these activities. 

well, what he referred to, robin, was that the president had authorized the sale of arms to iran. that's true. mr. hakim, i do not believe, referred to any activities. 

i see. in the lunch break, gentlemen, you met with the independent counsel lawrence walsh, who asked you not to grant immunity to col. north. are you reluctant to agree with him, senator inouye? 

mr. hakim's testimony this afternoon makes it very clear as far as i'm concerned that mr. north must appear before the committee and testify, because mr. hakim has unfortunately placed a cloud over the presidency of the united states. he made it without equivocation suggesting that the president of the united states was not only aware, but authorized these activities. and i think we need the testimony of col. north to either corroborate or deny this. 

robin, let me simply add that there is no question in my mind -- or really in the mind of any member of either committee i spoke to today after the meeting with judge walsh -- that of course the congress of the united states must hear from oliver north. oliver north was one of the people who claims to be close to the president. we have testimony on his allegations of telling the president certain things, which frankly i happen to think will be proven false. but this congress could not possibly allow these hearings to conclude without hearing from oliver north. and in addition to that, i would say here publicly that with the disclosures today -- and there may be explanations for them -- i still hope that col. north will come forward like bud mcfarlane came forward -- and testify voluntarily and take his chances. 

how long does mr. walsh want you to delay granting immunity -- indefinitely or for a further period? i mean, he's already asked and you've agreed to delay it until a certain point in june. 

well, there's not much more time to delay if we want to finish these hearings before the august recess. so it really was basically a request to indefinitely postpone or to do something. and we'll try to accommodate him as best we can, but in my view -- i can't speak for the other members of the committees, i think the chairman agrees with me that col. north will be heard in july. 

absolutely. 

i see. mr. rudman -- i'm sorry. senator inouye, from what you said, and we quoted you in that excerpt from the hearings, did you find mr. abrams a credible witness? 

i found mr. abrams to be an important witness with much to say. but because, for one thing, it shows what the government of the united states was going through during this period: deception for one thing, nondisclosure to the congress of the united states, keeping information away from the people of the united states. and i think secretary abrams demonstrated in a very dramatic way how this was being done. and i think it's an unfortunate chapter, but it had to be opened. 

you said you didn't know whom to believe, him or ambassador tambs. 

well, we are not prosecutors. if we were prosecutors, or court, we would decide who to believe. but in our case, all we do is bring the facts out. 

senator rudman, what did you mean by the expression, "curiosity would kill the cat."? 

well, let me simply say that it is my impression, after listening to this witness, mr. abrams, and others, that they were operating in kind of a twilight zone, and the way they decided to protect themselves was to not get terribly curious about things they didn't have to get curious about. and my point to him about the hassenfus shootdown was he was put in the position of misrepresenting to the american people and the country and the president and the secretary of state, his boss, for almost about three week, facts that were totally untrue. i happen to believe that secretary abrams believed what he said publicly at that time. i think he was misled. he was lied to, he was deceived, he was betrayed. but why didn't he push hard and find out what was going on? we all had our suspicion. that's what i meant. i said, "curiosity killed the cat."$ and in this case, mr. abrams thought himself as the cat. 

senator inouye, do you think mr. abrams is still misleading the congress? 

no, i believe he is telling us what he believes to be the truth. and as my colleague pointed out, i think the evidence indicates that he has been either misled or kept in the dark in many cases. but the phrase that brother rudman used is most appropriate. because here you find a situation where time, valuable time, was being spent to decide and debate upon whether [unintelligible] is a lethal weapon or humanitarian device. and yet there's no curiosity as to the miami herald article which indicated very clearly that col. north was doing something less than legal. and the hassenfus one was front page all over the united states. 

well, what does that suggest to you? 

well, as senator rudman indicated, on certain things they're not curious. 

it seems to me again, robin, that in those circumstances, abrams, who is tough, he is savvy, he is bright, all of us who have dealt with him have a lot of respect for his abilities -- certainly he was under some obligation if not to anyone other than himself, as not to simply say, "well, i trust my colleagues," but to go in there, close the door and have it out before he'd go hanging out there and misrepresenting not just himself but the entire position of this government. so i really think that is what i am most critical of and said so. 

the hassenfus incident occurred in his watch in nicaragua. it did not happen in africa or asia. this is his bailiwick. 

do you share the sentiments of those members of your committees today who suggested that his credibility to continuing as assistant secretary for future relations with the congress has been so impaired that he could not continue in that role? 

i would not go that far. i think a person should be given at least a second chance. 

mr. rudman? 

i think elliott abrams -- and i don't disagree with the chairman, but i must say that when you have the chairman of the house foreign relations committee saying what he said, when you have the chairman of the senate intelligence committee making an even stronger statement, you know, whether he has credibility or not is not the issue. the question is can he be effective? and i must say that elliott will have to decide that for himself. but i do have some doubts after hearing today's testimony. 

finally, gentlemen, senator inouye, at this stage in the investigations what is the major hole that remains in this story? what do you not yet understand that you want to know? 

the major hole will be filled hopefully by admiral poindexter and lt. col. north. 

and i would add to that probably don regan, possibly some of the other major members of the cabinet. as you know, robin, the committee divided hearings into two phases. phaseone, mainly to do with the contra activity of the nsc. and phase two, the iran arms sale. and of course all of that reflects on the president's knowledge. and i think we owe it to the president to get this over as quickly as we can and get these facts out. 

well, if there remains a hole, senator rudman, what is the question that describes that hole? or that points to it? in your mind, what is the outstanding question? 

well, obviously, we want to get all the details on how the iran arms sale was put together at the level of the administration. that is still not on the record very well, although we have a pretty good idea. but we must get north and poindexter and publicly to state in the most exquisite detail of what they did, what they told the president, and how they briefed the president, so that this president can either get on with affairs of government or not. and i happen to think the president -- and i have said consistently -- knew nothing of the diversion of profits to the contras. but you know, what i think and what the facts are can only be proven by people to testify. and it's important we get that testimony. which of course is another reason why judge walsh -- although i understand his problem -- must understand ours as well. 

i understand that. thank you, senator rudman, and senator inouye. aids/dr. jonathan mann 

finally tonight, more about aids. the third annual international conference on the dreaded disease is running this week in washington, and each night we are covering some aspect of it. tonight, we have a newsmaker interview with dr. jonathan mann, director of the aids program of the world health organization, one of the conference's main sponsors. dr. mann, welcome. 

thank you. 

how many people in the world have aids right now? 

well, there have been a total of over 51,000 cases of aids reported officially to the world health organization, from 113 countries around the world. now, we know that's an underestimate. the number that's important to us is the 113. these are the countries that have come forth with their report, and this demonstrates the global scope of this problem. 

a hundred and thirteen countries. give me a feel for where they are, what kind of countries they are. 

they're distributed all over the world. virtually all the countries of south america, central america and the caribbean, of course north america, every country in europe, most of the countries in africa, and several countries in asia, including some in the middle east. 

now, of the 50,000 plus cases, where are the majority of them, is there any breakdown there in terms of parts of the world? 

the majority of the cases actually have been reported from the americas. and they are the majority from the united states. but that gets us right to the point of whether the reported cases are the total of cases. and that we know is not the case. we know of at least a dozen countries that have not yet officially reported cases to the world health organization. 

why not? 

well, there's -- it's a complicated issue. there are a number of reasons. one reason is that in some cases, they don't have the diagnostic capability, the laboratory capability, to confirm the diagnosis. there are still some -- 

then how do you know they've got cases they're not reporting? 

well, in some cases, they have the diagnostic capability, they know they have cases, but there's still some political reluctance to talk about it. and this is related to the wave of stigmatization that we've seen around the world. people pointing fingers and wanting to lay blame, all of which interferes with the disease control effort. 

is there a fear also of panic among the population about it? 

actually, most of the countries in which aids has occurred, in those countries, there is a discussion at the national level. people are aware within the country. what we sometimes see, however, is a reluctance to talk openly to the international press. that sometimes can be related to tourism, it can be related to other concerns as well. 

what kinds of countries are these that are sitting on this kind of information? 

they include countries in different parts of the world. but particularly in africa. in africa, there's been a difficulty we've all experienced. because of the early hypotheses about the origins of the disease and the stigmatization of africans that has occurred, particularly in europe. and this has led to a reaction against that, and a defensiveness. fortunately, the world health organization has been able to work with these countries. and we're working already with 25 countries in subsaharan africa, helping them build their own strong national aids programs. 

what do you tell them? what words do you use to tell the head of a small country in africa, "tell the world that you have an aids problem." 

what we do is we say, "let's work together. let's collaborate. we know there's a problem. let's work together. we don't have a need to broadcast this in any major way, but what we need to do is start the work at the national level that will bring the disease under control." and when that happens the country then develops confidence, reports cases and that is accomplished. 

you've used that expression a couple of times now -- bring the disease under control. what does that mean at the state the disease is in right now? 

i think even though we're facing -- we do have a worldwide epidemic of infection with the aids virus -- we know what we need to know to bring the disease under control. we don't have to wait until there's a vaccine. we know how it spreads. we know that it spreads because of specific human behaviors which can be changed, which can be modified. 

that's primarily sexual behavior and drug use, correct? 

well, that's true for -- that's certainly true, but in addition, we're talking about blood transfusions that are not yet screened for safety in the developing world, and we're talking about the reuse of other needles and syringes other than for iv drug users in the developing world. and finally, of course, the spread from mother to child. but it's basically sexual spread throughout the world. 

mother to child has become a problem in many african nations, is that correct? 

yes it is, because in africa the sexual spread is predominantly heterosexual. obviously, women who are pregnant can also be at risk of being infected. and in some african cities, 10% or more of pregnant women are already infected with the virus. 

say that again? 

ten percent or more of women in some african cities are already infected with the virus. 

that is a stunning statistic. 

it is, and in fact,it translates, unfortunately, into an infant mortality rate due to aids in those counties that is greater than the total infant mortality rate in the united states from all causes. 

is there any country in the world, dr. mann, that you can cite as a good example of a country that has recognized the aids problem, tackled it and done something constructive to control it? 

actually, there are several. there are countries in europe, such as the united kingdom and switzerland, that have done an excellent job of informing their public broadly about the problem. they've used mail drops, leaflets to all households, and a variety of ways to inform people. 

what do they say? is it very blunt talk about it? is it about sexual behavior? what do they say? 

it's as blunt as the society feels it can handle -- which varies from country to country. 

sure. 

another country that needs to be cited in a very positive way is uganda. uganda has a major aids problem, but it has been open, and it has been clear both with the international community and internally. and so they have their "love carefully" campaign, which you hear about all over the country of uganda. we don't know yet what impact it's having, but the openness and frankness must be paying off. then, of course, there are other countries like australia, which has a very well coordinated national program dealing very aggressively of course with blood transfusions and educational programs and trying to deal with that very difficult problem of intravenous drug users. 

and are they actually having good results? are they stopping the spread of the disease? 

the best evident we have so far -- direct evidence -- comes from certain populations of gay men. gay men in certain cities in the united states and in europe, where it appears that the epidemic has slowed. it has not yet stopped, but it has slowed. the number of new infections seems to be on the decline. unfortunately, some people are still being infected. but this is the best direct evidence. now, if we look at evidence in terms of knowledge -- 

excuse me. when you find that -- when you find that the disease has leveled off somewhat, then are you able to go back and find out why it leveled off? 

the best evidence we have is that it's leveled off because of changes in behavior. 

brought on by fear or education -- 

and education. yes. fear by itself, of course, is useless. but education is clearly the key. and fear can be a strong motivation. 

you made a speech yesterday to the conference and you talked about the third stage of the aids epidemic and the cost and dislocation it's going to have on society. what did you mean by that? 

to look at the whole aids problem, we divide it into three phases. three succeeding waves of epidemics around the world. the first was the epidemic of the virus itself, which was a silent epidemic that began to spread worldwide in the mid- to late 1970s. 

it's still going on, isn't it? 

still going on. we estimate 50 to 10 million people are probably infected now with the virus. the second epidemic is the epidemic of the disease of aids, which comes several years after the epidemic of infection. 

$ o not all the 5 to 10 million are actually going to come down with aids, right? this is the second stage you're talking about now. 

that'sright. we don't know what percentage ultimately will develop aids, but we know that between 10 and 30% will likely develop aids in the next five years. so you have a first epidemic of infection, then an epidemic of disease. the third epidemic, which is also a worldwide epidemic, is the epidemic of social reaction and response -- to the economic costs, social impact, the cultural impact, and the political impact. 

speaking of costs, i was told a few moments ago that there is a new study out that shows that by 1991, aids worldwide is going to cost $ 37 billion. 

well, i'm not sure of the source of the study. and of course there are a lot of assumptions in that kind of projection. but we're facing a billion dollar level is clear. that we're facing in the next five years probably between 500,000 and 3,000,000 new aids cases in the world, coming from people already infected today with the virus is clear. what that means and what that translates to goes beyond the health statistics. it gets into the economic costs, but also into the cultural and social and political issues that we're seeing all over the world. 

that study, by the way, was done by the rand corporation. are you familiar with that study? 

not yet. i'm very interested to hear it, because it actually blends -- coincides rather well with our own projections and with a statement i made at the conference yesterday -- which is that it will cost billions of dollars in the next few years to try to bring this worldwide emergency under control. 

and the cost of that to society making a priority decision is also going to be enormous, which is also your point. 

it's very difficult, and in countries where the per capita annual health budget is less than one dollar, we're talking here about certain countries in central africa, the dilemmas are extraordinarily acute and they will need help. 

dr. mann, thank you very much. again, good luck to you and your efforts. 

again, the major stories this wednesday, businessman albert hakim told the iran-contra committees he set aside $ 200,000 in profits from the iran arms sales for oliver north's children. several democrats on the committee suggested assistant secretary of state elliott abrams might have to step down. independent counsel lawrence walsh asked the committees to deny immunity to col. north. but on the newshour the chairman and co-chairman of the senate committee, senators daniel inouye and warren rudman, said they have to have north's testimony. good night, jim. 

good night, robin. we'll see you tomorrow night. i'm jim lehrer. thank you and good night.
