intro 

good evening. three domestic stories occupy much of our attention tonight. what does today's fcc ruling on long distance phone charges mean to phone users? 

the state of black america. 

the poor have been relegated to an out of sight, out of mind status in american life. 

we talk to the man making that charge, the head of the urban league. and we have an expert update on the birth control pill: do the risks outweigh the benefits? jim lehrer's off; judy woodruff's in washington. judy?

also tonight, we'll hear secretary of state shultz explain that he didn't make much headway with the soviets on resuming arms talks. there's news about the u.s. easing economic sanctions against poland, and argentina cutting off aid to u.s.-backed rebels in nicaragua. and finally, we'll visit some american missionaries in el salvador who work behind the guerrilla lines. 

i'm not afraid. but i'm not afraid anywhere. i'm not afraid in cleveland, where i come from. 

secretary of state george shultz said today he had made no progress on reopening nuclear arms talks in his five-hour session with andrei gromyko yesterday. shultz arrived in oslo to brief the norwegian government on the talks and gave a press conference where he was questioned about the talks with the soviet foreign minister in stockholm. on the question of getting the soviets to return to the two sets of geneva arms negotiations, mr. shultz said this. 

in the discussions that i had with mr. gromyko we discussed many different aspects of arms control, and insofar as the two talks covering nuclear issues are concerned, i have nothing positive to report to you. 

the soviets have said they would not return to the talks until the u.s. and nato withdrew the medium-range missiles they've begun deploying in western europe. mr. shultz did say the soviets may be getting ready to reopen the east-west talks on limiting conventional forces in europe. other western diplomats in stockholm said moscow's warsaw pact allies were suggesting that those talks resume in mid-march. meanwhile, the soviets say they have begun deploying nuclear missiles in east germany and czechoslovakia to counter the nato deployments. this was reported today by the soviet army newspaper red star. 

judy? long distance charges -- fcc ruling 

the federal communications commission today tentatively postponed proposed new charges on local phone bills. in so doing, in delaying the so-called access fees, the fcc officials acknowledged they were cancelling most, if not all, of a planned reduction in interstate long distance rates. at&t had planned to cut its long distance rates by more than 10% this april, but that reduction had been tied to the payment of the access fees, an added $2 a month, also beginning in april. the fcc said it had decided to take most of this year to conduct further studies to see whether the fees would force some customers to give up their phone service altogether. the fcc had been under heavy pressure from congress to delay the access fees and thus eliminate any need for congress to take action to block them. republican senator robert dole today applauded the fcc move. 

here we're faced with legislation coming from the house, saying you're going to have a permanent moratorium, it's never going to take effect. and you have the packwood bill, which i'm a cosponsor of, which says you're going to have a four-year delay. now, facing that, i think the commission, the federal communications commission, said okay, let's act on this before -- and avoid any need for congressional action with a one-year moratorium. that's essentially what's happened. they report to congress by december 1st of this year. then there's time for comments, and i would guess it'll be probably next april, may or june of 1985 before any final decision is made. 

however, at&t, some consumer groups and another member of congress condemned the fcc decision. at&t said it would prove a disservice to the customers it is intended to help by scuttling long distance rate reductions. colorado congressman timothy wirth, who chairs a communications subcommittee in the house, joined with a consumer research group in charging the agency with playing politics, defusing the issue during an election year while sticking by its ultimate goal of imposing the fees. among others applauding the fcc decision was one of at&t's chief competitors, mci. 

the fcc today joined the house of representatives, the department of justice, the department of commerce and a number of members of the senate in the view that at&t's competitors should not be required to pay so much more for access until equal interconnection is available to them. and that could have affected the competitive vitality of this industry. the net effect, i believe, will be a healthy competition in the long distance market and a growing number of alternative long distance competitors for the consumer. 

now we look at the impact of today's news about delayed access charges and the fees for at&t's long distance competitors on the phone users. with us is merrill brown, who covers telecommunications for the washington post. mr. brown, let's take the delayed access charges first, the $2 monthly charge that was to be imposed for access for home users on long distance lines. how much is it going to save consumers? 

well, certainly this year it'll save consumers $2 a month from april on for the rest of this year. therefore, $18 or so. but in the long run it's very hard to tell because of the conflicting estimates on costs you get about long distance service. clearly on local bills, though, $2 a month is the consumer saving this year. 

so what will make the difference presumably is whether the long distance rates themselves will go down, what you charge for a national long distance call, not the access fee. 

that's right. at&t said today that it may or may not -- depending on how it evaulates the numbers and how it evaluates the fcc's final decision -- lower its rates 10%. it's unclear what they're going to do. there's a faction within at&t that says perhaps they ought to, to be able to compete with the other long distance carriers like mci. 

i see. and then there's a faction that says what? 

that says they ought not to take the hit on their bottom line, that that inevitably will bring about if they do cut rates that much. 

now that they are no longer a monopoly and they have to compete on wall street with -- well, with their competitors. 

absolutely. 

now, the fcc's decision, as i understand it -- am i right? -- does not affect the $6 access charge that big business has to pay, that business of a certain size will have to pay to get into the long distance lines. 

that's still in place. businesses of any size over two lines will pay $6 a month beginning this year, and that is designed to try to bring about an equilibrium. also, the business community didn't have the pressure mounted on capitol hill that consumer groups did, and they're not the political force on this issue that congress perceived phone users and residences to be. 

there aren't as many businesses as there are individual phone users and voters. 

exactly. certainly not voters. 

but small businesses that -- am i right? -- who have only one, who use only one phone line and were to have to pay the same $2 a month access charge, they like individual consumers are relieved of that, is that right? 

as of today's decision, they're exempted, yes. 

now, how are the local phone companies going to make up the revenues that the $2 access fee was designed to pay them to replace, as i understand it, the subsidy they used to get from the long distance rates? 

well, bell system officials say today that that's not really a problem, because the same formulas by which long distance carriers subsidize local phone service, in effect, are still in effect. and at&t and the other long distance companies are going to be paying those local companies the same they paid them before divestiture as it was. so i don't think that that's necessarily going to be the case. local phone-rate increases need not take place because of today's decision. and even if proposals are made to do so, state regulators can reject them as they've been rejecting local phone-rate increases all year. 

now, why, if this is good for consumers, as senator dole and the head of mci we just heard say it was, why are people like nader's congress watch, a consumer group, and tim wirth, a congressional democrat who's been very involved in this -- why are they against this? 

well, they don't like the whole concept of access charges, basically. they think it unfairly distributes the burden of the costs in the phone system too much onto residential users. they say that's unfair, and they'd like to see a permanent ban on access charges put into place. next year -- 

as the house in fact voted, a permanent moratorium. 

as the full house has voted. they say that after june '85, when access charges could go in place again, access charges may well be in place again because there won't be the election-year political pressure that was put on the fcc this year. 

since they are so unpopular with so many people, is it likely that instead of just an interim solution, this delay could become permanent and we'll never see access charges? 

well, that gets to the political question of what congress is going to do, and that is a very difficult one to call right now. thirty-two senators wrote to the fcc just yesterday to ask them to do essentially what they did today. that's a significant part of the united states senate. there's another 60-some-odd members who didn't express their views, and there is a bill from senator packwood which he intends to press for which would put on a moratorium. we'll have to see. political pressures in election years, particularly on pocketbook issues, play funny twists, and they should on this one too, i would think. 

so the access charges could come back in the summer of 1985 or they could go away forever, we just don't know yet. 

we don't know yet. 

now, on the other decision that was announced today, would you explain it to me? as i understand it, at&t's long distance competitors, like mci, had the rates they will have to pay for long distance to the local companies to hook in for long distance -- were much lower that was expected. now, can you tell us the figures and what it means? 

well, what it means, according to the long distance industry, the competitive long distance industry, that is, is that that's a much more competitive business under this decision than under the previous decision. they'll pay about half of what at&t pays for hookups into the local phone system now. before, under the previous decision they were paying considerably more than that, about 50% more than that. so if at&t pays nine cents, say, which is roughly what the figure is, to hook into a local line now, mci will pay four-some cents to do the same thing.and it's their contention that they shouldn't pay the same amount as at&t as long as they don't have the same kind of easy access to consumers that at&t has. if you want to use mci or sprint or allnet or a host of other services that are out there, you have to punch a lot of buttons, dial into the service, punch in your personal billing code. it's a slightly more complicated procedure. and the long distance competitors argue that until they have the same kind of simple pushbutton, one-button access that the at&t company has, they shouldn't pay the same rates. 

and, briefly, is the long-term effect of that through more competition to bring down long distance phone rates, do you think? 

well, certainly for the people around the country who have access to a long distance service, a competitive one, one competitive with at&t, it ensures that they'll keep the same kind of low rates they have. for at&t users or for people who need at&t for business services or for other things, it probably suggests that they won't get the same kind of cut at&t was planning on. 

well, mr. brown, thank you. judy? black america: "out of sight, out of mind"? 

more good news about the economy today on several fronts. the government said that americans' personal income was up 6.3% last year, the best showing since 1977. economists attributed the relatively healthy increase to last summer's income tax cuts, more people finding work and lower inflation. most predicted personal income would not grow as much in 1984. at the white house, however, a spokesman said the prospects for a sustained economic recovery are very good. 

in another measure of the recovery, the government also reported personal consumption spending rose 8.4% last year, a little better than the year before. that was mostly attributed to a sharp drop in the rate of savings. in addition, first-time claims for unemployment benefits hit their lowest point in four-and-a-half years in the first week in january. 

an 18% unemployment rate for blacks, and the fact that more than 50% of all black children live in families below the poverty line. in releasing the report, urban league president john jacob said simply, "the state of black america is a disaster." mr. jacob is with is with us here tonight to elaborate.mr. jacob, is the situation facing american blacks as serious as what you have said? 

we believe that all the evidence points in that direction. clearly, as the nation is moving toward an economic recovery, as unemployment is going down around the nation somewhere around 8.1, 8.2 percent, unemployment for blacks is at 18%; teenage unemployment is at 49%; a third of black people are living in poverty. therefore, even as the nation is going through a spirited recovery, it is not trickling down to black america, and black america is suffering and in desperate straits. 

well, why is that? why is, despite the fact that we're seeing all these improvements you mentioned in inflation and unemployment, that blacks aren't able to share in the goodies? 

well, i think there are a number of factors, one of which is that blacks have traditionally been in those jobs where the industries are hemorrhaging -- steel, rubber, auto -- and many of those jobs, even as they go through recovery will never replace many of the jobs that they lost during the recession. and so we paid a dear price for that. secondly i think blacks are confronted with the notion that they were the last hired and first fired as a result of the deep recession that we found ourselves in, and therefore we are affected by all of that that is happening. but i think thirdly, as you will note when you go through this paper, that there is a high-tech revolution that has taken place in the country, and blacks are in a mismatch with that revolution. we either live in the wrong place where high tech is being suburbanized. we picked up degrees in education and social science when high tech calls for another whole set of skills. we are dealing with a phenomenon that suggests that there are going to be a lot of jobs in the high-tech area, and they're simple not coming about. blacks only occupy one out of every 20 high-tech jobs. and therefore we have simply, for some reason, been faced with a condition that has placed us in opposition to that particular trend. 

who's to blame for this? 

well, i think there are a number of places to place blame, one of which is clearly that our society has never admitted that it has to make a concerted effort for inclusion of black people. the whole notion about affirmative action was designed to do that. the whole notion about the public-service sector accommodating a large sector of the black middle class allowed for an upward mobility of blacks, and then the decimation of the public-service arena calls for a broadening of the gap between black america and white america. 

when you blame it on society, you're not saying it's the fault of the republicans or the democrats or ronald reagan or anyone else; you're just saying white america? 

well, i'm just saying there are a set of economic circumstances that have not worked to the advantage of black people, and that black people have not been included in all of the developments that have taken place. i am blaming on the administration, however, in the exacerbation of the problem. when in fact you look at where black people were three years ago, four years ago, with the new administration and the reduction or elimination of many of the vital programs that service black people, that service poor people, where blacks were disproportionately placed, conditions have, as a result of that, grown worse for black america. 

what does the report say should be done to remedy this? 

well, we make a number of proposals, one of which is that we believe that the first priority item for black america must be jobs. therefore there must be a multidimensional strategy to provide work and training opportunities for black people. that is not going to be done with a single-dimensional program, and so we call for public works, we call for public service, we call for rewarding the private sector for hiring the long-term unemployed, in training the long-term unemployed, and we call for an industrial policy commitment that says that we will retrain those people that are being displaced out of the smokestack industries. 

and who's going to pay for all those jobs and all that retraining? 

well, i think what we ought to ask is who's paying for all the high unemployment, because if you look at the numbers today, all economists will agree that for every point of unemployment above 4%, it costs this country, either in lost taxes or in supporting higher unemployment, from $20 billion to $30 billion per point.so even with 8% unemployment, on the low side we're talking about $80 billion to support unemployment, and on the high side we're talking about $120 billion. i submit to you there ought to be more creative use of those dollars in order to get people working and training. 

but mr. jacob, you know what the political climate is in this country with ronald reagan maintaining pretty high ratings in the public opinion polls right now, and we know what his philosophy is.what do you think the chances are realistically that that sort of program would ever pass the congress? 

well, i think the chances are that the black vote is going to be decisive in 1984, and is going to be decisive not only in the presidential election but in senatorial elections. and i submit to you that those who are serious about attracting the black vote will have to address these problems that are critical to black america. 

what do you mean by that? 

i mean that they will have to come forth with an agenda that deals specifically with the interests and needs of black america if in fact they expect to get the black vote. 

but ronald reagan, one would presume, doesn't feel that he needs the black vote, or very much of the black vote, in order to win again. 

well, i would hope that mr. reagan would reassess that because i think the black vote is going to be very decisive, particularly in determing the electoral college votes. our report speaks to where those black voters are concentrated. they are concentrated in the large cities and the large states where the electoral college votes must come from. and so i would say that mr. reagan must reassess if in fact he hoped to remain at 1600 pennsylvania avenue. 

so you haven't given up on ronald reagan; you're saying you hope to change his mind, is that right? 

well, no, what i'm saying is that i hope mr. reagan understands the political realities that all the other candidates must come to grips with, and that in 1984 it is our contention that the black vote is going to play a major role in who occupies the white house. 

all right, thank you very much, john jacob, for being with us. 

thank you. 

robin? 

the united nations food and agricultural organization said today that nearly half the countries in africa are threatened by massive hunger and starvation this year.the fao said a significant part of the 150 million people living in 24 countries in east, west and southern africa faced grave food shortages. the causes were bushfires, livestock diseases, pests and civil disturbances, but the greatest was drought, considered the worst in a century in some areas. the u.n. agency said that 5.3 million tons of grains were needed for 1983-1984, of which 3.7 million tons had already been secured. meanwhile in washington, senator john danforth reported on his own personal observation of the hunger problem in africa. the missouri republican was asked by majority leader howard baker to make a personal inspection trip. the results, including senator danforth's own photographs, were presented to president reagan yesterday and made public at a news conference today. 

africa now is the number one hunger problem in the world. this mother could not give milk to the child. she was very hungry herself, and, as often true with hungry mothers, they cannot produce sufficient milk for the child, and you see the result. and all ages, of course, affected. the legs on that boy i think are illustrative. 

the people in one of the villages had had no food since november, and their diet consisted of leaves from trees, roots, and cashew nuts. and one of the things that i talked to the president about yesterday is the immediate need in mozambique not only to make sure food is available -- i think more important than anything else is to designate some organization, such as care or some other organization, to actually be present and to be responsible for the delivery of the food and the distribution of the food. i think if we're going to have any type of possible -- any sort of possibility of relative independence for that part of the world, there is going to have to be development assistance, again targeted for those countries where it's going to do some good. 

the united states is now spending about $300 million a year in emergency food aid for africa. senator danforth estimates that an additional $200 million in development assistance is needed. 

we'll be back in a moment. 

[video postcard -- sugarland mountain, pennsylvania] 

in casablanca, the islamic conference organization decided tonight to readmit egypt to membership five years after egypt was suspended for signing a peace treaty with israel. the egyptians have indicated they're interested in rejoining the 45-nation body, but have declared they would not submit to any conditions, such as repudiating the israeli-egyptian treaty. 

in lebanon, the guns around beirut were silent for a day while both moslems and christians closed their classrooms in mourning for the president of the american university, who was killed yesterday. but in a mountain area near the northern city of tripoli, four people were killed and 14 wounded in a fight between two rival factions of pro-syrian moslems. and in the southern city of sidon, gunmen attacked an israeli patrol, touching off a 30-minute firefight that closed the port and the business area for the third day in a row. 

in washington, the state department announced a relaxation of american economic sanctions against poland. by order of president reagan, the polish national airline will be allowed to land its planes on charter flights to the united states and polish vessels will be allowed to fish in american waters. and in rome, pope john paul has been discussing the possibility of opening diplomatic relations between the vatican and the communist government of poland, perhaps later this year. cardinal jozef glemp, the head of the polish catholic church, told reporters about it today as he left rome after a four-day visit. 

judy? missionaries in salvador 

argentina's new government, headed by democratically elected president raul alfonsin, announced today that it was ending all assistance to counterre volutionary forces in central america. those include the so-called contras the united states is backing in their struggle against the marxist government in nicaragua. alfonsin said he was aligning argentina with mexico and other latin countries which are seeking negotiated settlements to end the disputes there. 

meanwhile, there has been more fighting in el salvador, where government troops are trying to prevent leftist guerrillas from destroying the last remaining bridge over a major waterway. the lempa river divides the eastern third of el salvador from the rest of the country. since september the rebels have made significant gains toward their goal of taking over the area east of the river and declaring it a liberated zone. chirilagua is a small town in the eastern third, located behind rebel lines. our special correspondent, charles krause, recently spent five days there and discovered that even though the town is controlled by guerrillas, there is still an important american presence there. 

chirilagua fell to the guerrillas last september 25th. every two or three days, patrols from nearby guerrilla bases entered chirilagua to make their presence felt, but otherwise life here hasn't changed very much since the guerrillas took control. buses still connect chirilagua with other parts of el salvador. the post office still functions.and despite their avowed marxism, the guerrillas have made no attempt to disrupt chirilagua's religious life. on sundays there's been no change at our lady of guadalupe church. mass is still celebrated, very much as usual. what is unusual is that for many years the chirilagua parish has been staffed by american missionaries from cleveland, ohio. that hasn't changed either. 

well, since the end of september the guerrillas have nominal control over the town.they haven't hindered us in any way. we're cautious. you know, we can't accept necessarily their beliefs or their philosophical background they're coming from -- it's not the same as ours -- and it's a delicate and complicated situation. 

father john loya is one of four american missionaries in chirilagua. he, father david fallon[?], sisters therese osborne[?] and maria berlich[?], are believed to be the only american priests and nuns living and working behind guerrilla lines in el salvador. but unlike some other foreign priests who've embraced the guerrillas, these americans are not radicals or political activists. 

it's a really tense situation because, coming from the united states where we have a tradition of freedom of speech, it is very hard to adjust to a situation in which you don't feel that same liberty. 

sister therese told us that she and her colleagues from cleveland view their mission as ministering to the needs of the people of chirilagua, regardless of which side has political control of the town and surrounding area. 

we're foreign missionaries, and i think that we are fulfilling a role right now in the country, helping people, helping the christian communities. and we want to be able to remain in this area. 

father david has been in el salvador for six years. he's the senior member of the cleveland mission and pastor of the chirilagua church. 

before we came here, there was no priest; and if we weren't here, there wouldn't be any prests or sisters, so that our work is very extensive. a lot of the work is sacramental work, that is, celebrating the mass and baptism and weddings, other sacraments. but despite that, i like to think that the focus we have is to encourage and train lay leadership, knowing that we can be there, seldom be there -- somebody has to do most of the work of evangelizing, of bringing the message of christ to others. 

in addition to their work in the town of chirilagua, the priests celebrate mass at least once a month in about 25 small villages, villages like el cucol[?]. the american missionaries work in an area of about 100 square miles, all of it now at least nominally controlled by the guerrillas. 

one of the communities we visit is named guadalupe. we usually only go there once a month, but i was visiting there and i knew this woman was ill; i'd visited her before in a community called la nina chinita, it means like the child -- it's term of endearment; her name is really cypriana[?]. she's been living there for about, oh, better part of a year. and so i decided to bring her communion, because i knew that she wanted communion. and she was just overjoyed to have a visit. simple faith. she knows she's ill, she doesn't want to go to a hospital; she wants to die at home. one of the things that struck me quite quickly was the way people are very close to the birth and death. people are born in their homes, not in hospitals, in the rural areas. they die in their homes. they prepare the body.on more than one occasion i have been celebrating a mass or wedding, and because at that same time someone died, they brought the body in. and we had a wedding and a funeral at the same time, and the people were not upset in the least. they're just not hidden from those realities. 

outsiders are often shocked by how primitive conditions are. sister maria told us that she too was shocked when she first came to chirilagua three years ago. 

the actual reality of chirilagua was much different than just seeing it in the pictures and in the slides, because the poverty of some of the places is really striking. i just couldn't believe that people really did live in little stick huts. 

infant mortality is high. life expectancy for adults is low.at least once a week sister therese travels to outlying villages in the parish, often by horseback to work with volunteer health teams. it's not strictly religious work. but it is very much a part of what the cleveland mission is all about. 

each local community has three to seven team members who will learn about certain health themes and then present them to their neighbors. the health needs are so great that if we were to work on the curative aspect, giving shots or dispensing medicines, we wouldn't even begin to scratch the surface. so we're trying to work in the preventive angle, hoping to prevent mostly infant deaths. 

if children do survive, education is a luxury many of their parents cannot afford. by the age of eight or nine, many children in el salvador, especially in rural areas, must work. sister maria has taught reading skills to illiterate adults, but most of her work is with children, who learn more than just religion in her classes. 

it's unrealistic to expect that they'll ever be able to reach any high formal level of education. at least they will have had the dignity of saying, "once i did go to school, and i did learn something." 

what even the best-educated salvadorans have not learned is how to resolve their economic and political differences. when chirilagua fell last fall, the guerrillas explained their political program and promised not to invite an army attack by occupying the town full time. about a thousand government supporters fled, fearing the guerrillas would confiscate private property and kill those identified with the government. the situation here could have been most difficult and dangerous for fathers david and john, sisters therese and maria. they are, after all, catholic missionaries living in a town controlled by marxist revolutionaries, and americans working in an area dominated by guerrillas who consider the united states their principal enemy. we asked them if they weren't afraid to remain here, knowing the guerrillas could one day turn on them, or the government could accuse them of being leftist sympathizers if the army ever regains control of chirilagua. 

there's always a certain amount of uncertainty associated with a situation like this of conflict -- what's going to happen next? we feel it, the people feel it. 

i would think that we are being treated or approached as individuals. the boys will condemn the yankees and the imperialism and everything like that, but they've met four of us here, and have respected us in that regard. human right, or human value, or whatever values they're working with. 

people are very, very nervous. many of them are suffering from nervous disorders now with the constant tension. one side may be in charge today, and another side may be in charge tomorrow. and as long as there are two different sides, maybe there isn't any problem right now, but if there's a battle -- they call it in spanish an enfrentamiento -- people are going to be hurt and people are going to be killed, and i guess that's their constant fear. 

i'm not afraid. but i'm not afraid anywhere. i'm not afraid in cleveland, where i come from. and anything could have happened to me where i used to live in cleveland, the same as anything can happen to me here. so i think that's where my idea of what faith and who god is comes in. 

we can travel a road of faith or we can travel a road of fear. and as a priest, following the example of our lord, a great deal of my job or my vocation is to help people make the decision: what's the basic denominator that we're living our lives by? is it by faith or is it by fear? this is one way of spreading or teaching the gospel. 

you may remember that in 1980 four american churchwomen were killed in el salvador. their families are reportedly angry at a state department decision this week not to release a report on the failure of the salvadoran government to bring to trial five soldiers accused of murdering the americans. two of the women were from cleveland, members of the same team of missionaries working in chirilagua. 

we'll be back in a moment. 

[video postcard -- cade's cove, tennessee] 

in new york, a federal appeals court tonight turned down a last-minute effort by former new jersey senator harrison williams to delay beginning his prison sentence for bribery in the abscam investigation.in an unusual hearing after the usual court hours, the second circuit court of appeals denied a request for delay so williams could file another appeal against his conviction. that left williams under orders by the trial judge to report to the federal prison in allenwood, pennyslvania, by midnight tonight to begin his three-year sentence. 

the medical examiner in san antonio, texas, ruled today that major general robert owenby, the army reservist who was found hanged in a stairwell, committed suicide. when the general's body was found eight days ago, his hands were bound behind his back and there was a note pinned to his clothes saying he had been executed. the medical examiner said today that tests made by his office and the fbi led to the conclusion that the general wrote the note himself as a deception. the examiner also said that owenby was deeply in debt. 

robin? birth control pill

now, stories from our medical beat. first, new evidence was reported today linking damage to unborn babies with mothers who smoke cigarettes during pregnancy. a study made at johns hopkins university in baltimore showed that young rats whose mothers were exposed to moderate amounts of carbon monoxide during pregnancy suffered impaired memories and ability to learn. the researchers said the amounts of carbon monoxide were similar to the amounts taken in by a heavy smoker. the effect on memory was said to be more pronounced, but there was also an effect on learning ability. earlier tests have shown that the children of women who smoked heavily during pregnancy suffer a handicap when taking achievement tests. 

our next major segment tonight is an update on the birth control pill. twenty-four years after it was introduced, revolutionizing birth control in this country, the debate over how dangerous the pill is still rages. charlayne hunter-gault has the details. charlayne? 

even with inconclusive results in the debate over the pill, some 150 million women worldwide have used it. that makes the pill the most widely used form of birth control, second only to sterilization. over the years, however, various studies have linked the pill to problems like increased risk of stroke, heart attack, blood clots, high blood pressure, cervical cancer and breast cancer. but other studies have shown that the pill also has a protective effect, lowering the risk of ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer. which affects the lining of the womb, and pelvic inflammatory disease, the leading cause of sterility in women. 

occasionally the studies that are released seem to contradict each other outright. for example, several studies last fall found a higher rate of breast cancer, particularly among women who used the pill before their first pregnancy. but last march, another report by the centers for disease control found just the opposite. it said neither short- nor long-term oral contraceptive use appeared to increase a woman's risk of breast cancer. the head of that study is dr. howard ory, deputy director of epidemiology for the cdc. he has been studying both the protective effects and the drawbacks of the pill for 13 years. he joins us tonight from atlanta. dr. ory, what's your overall viewpoint about the safety of the pill? dr. ory, in atlanta, can you hear me? 

yes, i can now. 

good, thank you. my question was, what's your view overall about the safety of the pill? 

well, i think for a young healthy woman that the benefits outweigh the risks. 

do you want to elaborate on that a little bit? 

sure. i think that the major risk of oral contraceptives is heart attacks and strokes. you probably said this -- i didn't have audio when you were at the beginning. and i think that risk is mainly confined to women who are over 35 and who smoke. for example, i estimate that about 500 women in the u.s. a year, out of the 10 million who use the pill, die as a result of oral contraceptive use. and most of those, probably about 400, i would estimate, are in the group who are over 35 and who smoke. on the other hand, young healthy women derive the benefit of not getting pregnant, of course, from taking the pill, and then they have many other benefits in addition to that, that have a -- 

all right, excuse me. we'll get to the benefits in a minute. but let me just ask you this question. how do you explain the fact that there are at least three other studies that contradict your conclusions about the risk of breast cancer? you say there is no significant risk, but these others say there is. 

well, it's real difficult -- i think if you look at the picture overall, i think all studies, there are maybe 12 or 13 of them now, would say that there is no increased risk of breast cancer. there are two studies out now that dwell on particular subgroups of women -- one, women who took the pill before age 25 and who used particular brands, and another that looks at women who took the pill before their first birth. both of those studies together are not as large as our study and they're not as representative of the u.s. either. 

i see. now, earlier, you said you didn't hear my delineation of some of the protective effects, but i listed a number of those effects. how important exactly are they in weighing the risk and benefits? 

well, i think that the major benefit, of course, is the very powerful protection against unwanted pregnancy. i think of them as an added benefit, the other benefits. i wouldn't use the pill to derive those benefits, but if you're using it to prevent pregnancy, you'd get these additional benefits. 

in your view, is all the evidence in on the dangers of the pill, or at least enough in that you could pretty much say without being worried about it that the pill is generally safe for everybody to use, except for those subgroups you mentioned? 

well, i think we have seen about 15 to 20 years of epidemiologic studies on the pill. it's impossible, of course, to predict what's going to happen to women as they get to be 60 and 70, because there are no women who took the pill who, you know, who are now in their 60s and 70s. but given that caveat, i think that we know the major problems with the pill already. 

all right, thank you. we'll come back. robin? 

another researcher, who sees the risks differently, is dr. diana petitti, who has studied the effects of the pill for seven years. dr. pettiti is an assistant professor of community medicine at the university of california at san francisco, and she joins us tonight from public station kqed. dr. pettiti, when dr. ory says the benefits outweigh the risks, what is your opinion? 

well, it's my opinion that we don't know enough yet about the relationship of oral contraceptives to breast cancer to be certain that the benefits outweigh the perhaps equal, but i want to reserve judgment, my judgment about the ultimate risk-benefit equation until the story on breast cancer is clarified. 

and what will clarify that? 

well, i hate to say, but it may be further research. 

i see. and over how many years, do you think? 

i don't think we'll know for certain whether or not oral contraceptives have an effect on breast cancer at ages 60 or 70 until women who have used oral contraceptives become 60 or 70 years of age. since oral contraceptives were first marketed in the 1960s, and were only used widely in perhaps the late 1960s and the early '70s, it probably won't be for another 10 or 20 years that we have the full answer about the relationship of oral contraceptives to breast cancer. 

statistically, with the known risks, like an increased risk of stroke or a heart attack, statistically how common is that risk? dr. ory just said 500 women out of 10 million, perhaps. is that of the order of the risk, in your view? 

i don't -- i think dr. ory was quoting figures for mortality. i think if you add in the cases where there is an event, say, of myocardial infarction or a stroke, that the woman doesn't die, that the total number of cases in the united states may be three to five times that high. i think the risks are low -- they're probably lower than the risk of getting into an automobile accident and becoming seriously injured if one doesn't fasten one's seat belt. but that's not the question. the question is whether or not oral contraceptives are more or less safe than alternative forms of birth control that women might use if oral contraceptives were not so -- didn't have other benefits, particularly the benefit of being easy to use and highly effective. 

now, would you recommend the birth control pill as a primary, as the first form of contraception or birth control? 

no, i wouldn't. i would recommend that all women who can use barrier methods of contraception successfully -- that means methods of contraception such as the diaphragm or the condom, or the foam and condoms, that that would be my first choice of birth control for all women in the united states. 

of course that, i understand, lowers the effectiveness of the birth control, does it not? 

i think the effectiveness of the diaphragm and of condoms is dependent on how well the person uses them. i think there's some recent evidence that women over 35 who are married and in a stable relationship have an effectiveness rate for use of the diaphragm which is almost the same as that for the pill. 

are there some kind -- is there one -- is there a category of women who in your view should not be using the pill? 

oh, yes, certainly. women over 35 years of age who smoke cigarettes should not use the pill. 

because of an increased risk of stroke or heart attack? 

heart attacks, strokes. 

and women who are over 35 who do not smoke? 

i think there's still some question. it would be my advice that women over 35 who don't smoke and who are certain that they're not going to have any more children should consider sterilization. on the other hand, for a perfectly healthy woman with no family history of heart disease, i think using the oral contraceptive might be reasonable, particularly if it's a low-dose oral contraceptive. 

well, thank you. charlayne? 

dr. ory, what do you say to dr. petitti's feeling that there should be at least another 10 to 20 years of research before you can definitively say or even recommend that women use the pill? she's just not convinced that it's as safe as you say. 

well, i can't argue with that. on the other hand, people have to make a decision today, and i wouldn't throw the pill out because we're not absolutely 100% certain that it's -- that this, that or the other thing wouldn't happen. i think we are reasonably certain now that young healthy women can use it with a good margin of safety. 

dr. petitti, what about that response? and in addition to which, he had said earlier that there are at least 12 to 13 studies, compared with the two or three -- 12, 13 supporting his position that the benefits outweigh the risks, as opposed to two or three that say they don't? 

well, first, i certainly agree with dr. ory that we shouldn't throw out the pill as a form of birth control. however, i think it has to do with how we advocate the pill in relationship to other forms of contraception with similar effectivenesses when used properly. 

what do you mean by that?do you think the public is being misled or -- 

well, i think that certain people are advocating the use of the pill as an entirely safe form of contraception, that its benefits strongly outweigh its risks and that its risks are really minimal. i don't think we can say that. 

you mean certain people like dr. ory? 

no, i haven't heard howard say that in public. 

dr. ory, is that your position? 

no. my position is that for a young healthy woman, i think -- i quite agree with diana that the safest -- the method of contraception that has the lowest mortality would probably be to use a diaphragm or condom or some barrier method, and if you get pregnant, to back that up with an abortion. that, if that is morally acceptable to you, is the form of birth control that has the lowest mortality and complication rate.however, once you put that aside, i think that, say, for people under age 35, that the pill, the iud, the condom, diaphragm, if you look at the overall mortality, deaths, that those women face, they're about the same. 

what about that, dr. petitti? 

i'm not quite certain whether howard said that they're all the same. i think that we don't know what's going to happen with breast cancer, that there have been 13 or 14 studies. however, only the most recent of those studies, including that of dr. ory, has addressed the question of whether or not early use of oral contraceptives by women before their first pregnancy will be entirely safe, partly safe, very risky, or a little bit risky. 

well, don't a lot of women -- perhaps not a lot of women, but aren't women before the age of 25 who have not had children, don't they run the risk of breast cancer whether they take the pill or not? 

certainly the very fact of having delayed birth until later years increases their risk of breast cancer. however, the studies that have been published most recently have shown that use of oral contraceptives for a long period of time increases their risk over and above that of having delayed the age at which they have their first child. 

dr. ory, if this is -- 

can i disagree with that? 

sure. 

i think that that is -- that diana is putting her finger on what i think is the problem with those two studies, the pike study and the vessey study, they don't have enough numbers to adequately control for the age that women have their first child. and i think that's what our study can do, and we don't see that risk. 

well, i had a comment about dr. ory's study, which was that in his study, women were included up through the ages of 55, and that in both of the studies that found an increased risk of oral contraceptive use for breast cancer in women using oral contraceptives before their first pregnancy, they included women who are quite a lot younger -- a large number of women who were a lot younger. the maximum age in dr. pike's study was 37 and in dr. vessey's most recently published study about 45. and i think that it's only now that we're beginning to have sufficient numbers of women who have used oral contraceptives for long periods of time before their first pregnancy, that we can begin to answer the question. so that in my opinion, many of the 10 to 13 studies of breast cancer that have been done do not shed light on that important question. 

dr. ory, we just have a few seconds left. what's a woman who is very confused about what to do, what's she to do if experts like the two of you and these studies disagree? what would you suggest? 

well, you know, like anything else, you have to weigh the evidence as best you can and make a decision. i mean i don't know completely if everything i eat is unhealthy or healthy to me, but i make my choices and i do it. and, you know, diana and i are both looking at the same data and coming up with slightly different conclusions, but i think both of us are saying that the pill is a reasonable form of contraception. 

all right, well, i'll have to leave it on that interpretation and hope that dr. petitti also meant the same thing. thank you both. judy? 

finally tonight, a story from the mountains of southwest china, where the world's only population of wild giant pandas faces the danger of imminent starvation.there are fewer than a thousand of these animals living in the wild, and their number is expected to drop even lower because of a severe shortage of bamboo, their diet staple. experts predict the crisis will worsen within six months and will continue for five to eight years until the bamboo, through its natural cycle, is replenished. today, the world wildlife fund held a news conference in washington to explain the efforts under way to save the pandas. 

i would estimate that about a quarter of all the pandas remaining in the wild face a real emergency. now, as to the rescue methods, there are really three basic kinds. one is to build some holding stations where starving pandas can be taken to be rehabilitated for eventual release back into the wild. another method is supplementary feeding of animals in the wild. the final, main method is to transfer animals to a new habitat. when you only, let's say, have a thousand animals, every single one that you save has potential for considerable impact. 

let's hope they do find a way to save them. good night, robin. 

good night, judy. that's our newshour for tonight. we will be back tomorrow night. i'm robert macneil. good night.
