

good evening. leading the news this tuesday, cia director gates called the soviet union "dangerously unstable." there were reports and denials of soviet president gorbachev's plans to resign, and the mideast peace talks resumed in washington. we'll have the details in our news summary in a moment. judy woodruff is in new york tonight. judy. 

on the newshour tonight, the highly publicized rape trial of william kennedy smith is our first focus. should it be shown on national television? and what effect will it have on other women who charge they've been raped? we have four views. then kwame holman has a documentary report on the industry that keeps tabs on your credit rating. news summary 

cia director robert gates said today the situation in the soviet union was dangerously unstable. although there was no threat to u.s. security, gates said there wasa great potential for internal unrest. he spoke before the house armed services committee this morning.

all of the former soviet republics face enormous economic, social, and political problems that will make the transition to democracy in a market economy difficult and potentially dangerous. the economy is in a freefall, with no prospects for reversal in sight. severe economic conditions, including substantial shortages of food and fuel in some areas, the disintegration of the armed forces and ongoing ethnic conflict will combine this winter to produce the most significant civil disorder in the former ussr since the bolsheviks consolidated power. 

u.s. ambassador to the soviet union, robert strauss, said millions of soviets were unhappy and frustrated. he also raised the possibility of a military coup, saying no one had heard yet from the soviet army. he said they remained a wild card. in moscow, there were conflicting stories today about whether president gorbachev would resign. the reports came a day after gorbachev rejected the minsk agreement which forms a slavic commonwealth and three soviet republics. we have a report by gaby rado of independent television news. 

mr. gorbachev's office said he held meetings as normal inside the kremlin today, but nothing could hide the fact that the president has not been seen in the flesh for more than 48 hours. and the speculation about a possible gorbachev resignation heightened when one of his closest and most trusted advisers, georgy shakhnazarov, speaking to young politicians forum, let slip his own opinion in answer to a question. 

[speaking through interpreter] as for your view that he will have to go, that is your right to think like that as representatives of parties with your own positions. as i understand it, the situation's such that one probably wouldn't have to wait too long for it. 

later, mr. shakhnazarov claimed his remarks had been misinterpreted. it only meant that gorbachev's fate depended on the fate of the union. but it was enough for the president's official spokesman to be bombarded at a news conference with inquiries about his boss's future. 

[speaking through interpreter] as for the question of how often president gorbachev is thinking over his possible resignation, i can say that presently he is not thinking of resigning. 

and there was influential backing for mr. gorbachev's stand against the minsk agreement from inside the all union foreign ministry. 

[speaking through interpreter] i am very much afraid that we are beginning to witness something whose consequences cannot be predicted by anyone. there's no justification for the division of an old commonwealth which took decades and centuries to form. i must say this very frankly. 

president nazarbayev of kazakhstan, sworn into office today, also gave the minsk agreement the cold shoulder. he announced that rather than join the new commonwealth, he'd prefer his vast republic to go it alone without the slav nations. at the same time, the split in the former union deepened, with the parliament and the ukraine, which last weekend declared itself independent, voting by a massive majority to endorse the minsk agreement. the parliament in byelorussia followed suit. president kravchuk of ukraine accused mikhail gorbachev of wanting to keep his personal power intact, while simply talking about political reform. but tonight a group of demonstrators backing the union gathered near red square, claiming that the three slav presidents had effectively carried out another coup de ta. they waved red banners. the great irony is that on street level the beleaguered mr. gorbachev is now only finding support from the hardline wing who were in former times his natural opponents. 

in yugoslavia, the federal army renewed its attack on the croatian town of osijek. croatian officials said the serbian-dominated army began the shelling just after dawn this morning. united nations officials hope to send a peacekeeping force to croatia, but u.n. secretary general perez decuellar said yesterday a total cease-fire must be in place first. judy. 

the second round of middle east peace talks began today in washington. israeli delegates participated in three separate sets of meetings with delegations from syria, lebanon, and a joint jordanian-palestinian team. after this morning's session, israeli and palestinian representatives said their discussions were stalled over procedural differences. the palestinians say they now want to meet separately with the israelis instead of jointly with the jordanians. freed hostage terry anderson arrived back in the u.s. today accompanied by his six-year-old daughter and her mother. she was greeted by a large crowd of news reporters and cameras at new york's kennedy airport. anderson was freed last week after more than six years of captivity in lebanon. 

the nation's foreign trade deficit rose to $10 1/2 billion in the third quarter. the july to september deficit followed two quarters of trade surpluses caused mostly by contributions by u.s. allies for the cost of the gulf war. president bush talked about trade and other economic matters on a visit to chicago today. he repeated his concerns about high unemployment and slow growth, but he said there were positive developments such as increased u.s. exports. he said free trade was an important factor in reviving the economy. he spoke at the chicago mercantile exchange. 

free and fair trade means more jobs for americans and we must not pull back into some isolationistic sphere listening to the siren's call of america first. and we need to stand together against that call from the left and against that call from the right to stay within ourselves. we owe the world leadership and they're going to get to it from this president. 

patrick buchanan announced his candidacy for the republican presidential nomination today. the 53-year-old conservative columnist and television commentator did it in concord, new hampshire, before a group of supporters. buchanan said his candidacy will be aimed at working people of both political parties. he said president bush had broken his promise by raising taxes after saying, "read my lips, no new taxes." 

the u.s. supreme court today struck down a new york state law which confiscated profits made by criminals for books, movies, and other materials describing their crimes. the law required that the money be given to the crime victims. in a unanimous ruling, the court said the law violated freedom of expression. one of the country's largest credit reporting companies today settled a lawsuit with 19 states and the federal trade commission. trw was accused of violating consumer privacy and inaccurate credit reporting. the settlement requires the company to change its procedures and provide credit reports within four days to consumers who ask for them. trw maintains credit histories on more than 170 million americans. 

burmese opposition leader ansan suchi today formally received the nobel peace prize. she remains under house arrest in burma and could not travel to oslo, norway, for the ceremony. the prize was accepted by her two teen-age sons. her eldest son said his mother accepted in the name of the men, women and children who continue to sacrifice their well-being, their freedom, and their lives in pursuit of a democratic burma. the 46-year-old activist has led burma's democratic reform movement since 1988. today hundreds of pro-democracy students demonstrated in the burmese capital, calling for her release. 

that's it for the news summary. just ahead on the newshour, fallout from the william kennedy smith rape trial and a documentary report on the credit reporting done on all of us, how accurate and how private. focus - tv trial 

the rape trial of william kennedy smith is our lead tonight. today, the defendant, the nephew of the late president, john f. kennedy, and of u.s. senator edward kennedy, told a jury in west palm beach, florida his version of what happened on a beach there last march. but jury members won't the only ones listening to his testimony. the trial and the events leading up to it have received widespread media coverage. from the start, the trial has been a graphic, even brutal, national lesson in how the criminal justice system works. whatever the charge, evidence is needed for a conviction so evidence as specific as the accuser's dress and underwear were examined and passed from juror to juror. the experts gave their dryly factual descriptions about grains of sand and semen spots and torn stockings. 

[on witness stand] the bra was in very good condition. i didn't note any defects or tears or any stains of any sort. 

with reference to your background in examining clothing submitted on behalf of individuals who have alleged sexual battery, in how many instances have you found any damage to any bras in those examinations? 

very few. 

these are things that might come up in any rape trial, but this is the nationally televised trial of william kennedy smith, accused of raping a woman at the family estate in palm beach last easter weekend after an evening of drinking. last wednesday, the woman making the accusation took the stand to tell her story to the jury under the questioning of prosecutor moira lasch. 

[smith trial direct examination of alleged rape victim] was the penis inside your vagina? 

yes. 

did he ejaculate? 

yes. 

did he say anything else to you? 

i don't know. 

how long -- is there any way you can estimate how long he spoke? 

i don't know. 

did it appear to you that he had any difficulty in entering you? 

yeah. 

was that painful for you? 

yeah. 

because the trial has been covered live by tv, an international audience got to hear the accuser's detailed allegations. her face was hidden by an electronic screen, as required by florida law. she described how smith had met her at a bar, danced with her, taken her to the kennedy compound, taken her walking along the beach, kissed her, then tackled her and assaulted her. 

what do you mean by the word "tackle?" 

i was running and he hit me from behind and had me on the ground. 

did he ever remove your underwear? 

no. 

were you able to scratch him at all? 

i don't know. i got my hand down there. i was trying to get him out of me and i don't know if i got him scratched or not. 

that entire account and much of the evidence supporting it underwent a close and frequently grueling cross- examination by smith's lawyer. 

i think you told us yesterday that you said that your left arm was pinned down, is that correct? 

yes. 

you said that your right arm was pinned down. 

it was pinned between us. 

you said that his chest was on your chest holding you down, correct? 

yes. 

you say that he was at the same time pulling up your dress? 

he was pushing my dress up. 

and then he was able to push your panties aside, and i take it you mean by pushing the crotch to the side? 

[crying] i don't know he did it. he just, he did it. 

at the same time he was able to enter you while unable to obtain an erection? 

[crying] i -- all i know is he had me down, he pushed my dress up, he pushed my panties aside, and raped me. 

but your description of it is that you have your right arm pinned, right, you have your left arm pinned, right? 

my right arm is pinned between his chest and my chest. 

and he's pushing down on you? 

yes. 

at the same time he can pull up your dress, he can hold your panties aside, and he could enter you without being able to obtain an erection? 

i don't -- he raped me. 

thank you. 

throughout the first week's testimony, smith, himself, remained a calm, silent figure seated at the defense table. today he got his turn to testify and his was a very different story than the one given by his accuser. 

well, she unbuttoned my pants and i took her panties off and, with her help, and, and we embraced and i put the towel down on the lawn and she took off her panties and, uh, uh, and she, we were necking for a while and she was massaging me and i wasn't excited and she put me inside of her and we started to - - she said to be careful -- and we started to make -- have sex. 

whatever the jury decides, the issue of so-called "date rape" has been brought to the attention of millions of americans in the past week or so. we examine the impact of the trial and of its coverage now from four different perspectives. ellen hume is the executive director of the shorenstein-barone center on press & politics at harvard university. ann lewis is a political analyst in boston. steven brill is the president and editor-in-chief of court tv, which has televised the trial daily since it began. and susan xenarios is a clinical social worker and director of the rape intervention program at st. luke's roosevelt hospital in new york city. steven brill, first of all, how large an audience, television audience, is watching this trial? you court tv, the cable channel is televising it. cnn is also televising it. do you have an estimate on how many people are watching? 

well, cnn's been doing large parts of it. we've been doing it gavel to gavel, the way we do most trials that we cover. i don't have any guess, except that cnn's ratings, their normal daytime ratings, which aren't that high normally, have gone up and we think ours are higher than they usually are, though during the day since we started in july, we've been getting very high ratings with everything we've done. 

well, i read the other day, for example, that your channel reaches into what, more than 5 million homes in the united states and cnn reaches some 50 some million homes -- 

yeah. 

-- so potentially millions of people are watching. 

oh, sure, that's right. 

why are you televising this trial? 

well, for the same reason we televise trials all over the country every day, 24 hours a day, that is what we do. we are a cable channel that attempts to bring the justice system, the civil justice system, the criminal justice system, to people so that they can watch it, so that they can be enthralled by it, and maybe even learn something by watching it. we do swimming pool accident cases. we do lots of criminal cases. our goal is to de- mystify the system. our goal, i might add also, is to go beyond the sound bytes, the lurid sound bytes that we just saw just now. 

but is there something additional about this trial because of the kennedy family member involved that has made you interested in it and cnn? 

you'd have to ask the people at cnn. this is the first trial i've known they've ever covered. we cover all kinds of trials. we cover trials involving famous people. we cover trials involving people that you and i have never heard of. 

and what purpose do you think it serves for you specifically to be broadcasting this one? 

this one? 

hmm mmm. 

here we have a trial where everybody comes to their television set understanding who the people are and, indeed, what the issue is. and by showing the actual trial, i think we've provided more of a lesson in the burden of proof, in the standard of beyond a reasonable doubt, and the whole issue, as you pointed out, of date rape or acquaintance rape than people would get if they stacked a bunch of civics textbooks on their head and tried to read all of them. 

ellen hume, what purpose do you think is served by televising this trial nationally? 

well, i think it gives an opportunity for people like steven brill and for cnn and all news organizations to get a big kick, a big circulation in viewership hit. news has become entertainment and what's more entertaining, despite the down side, it creates even more victims than might be there in the courtroom, but it's very entertaining to look at the rich and the powerful getting into trouble. and if sex is involved, then naturally it's going to be even more exciting for these people. 

a lot of what we do, our gavel-to-gavel coverage, isn't nearly as entertaining as pbs's selection of these very lurid sound bytes. we do the whole trial, the boring stuff, the stuff that's very interesting, and we are a news organization. we are a news organization covering the legal system that is second to none. we are run by people who publish legal publications that are second to none. and the fact that it's entertaining, i'm not sure what ellen means by the difference between entertainment and news. maybe she can help us with that. 

ellen. 

well, clearly, i'm not saying that it's your fault that your broadcasting trials. i think that's probably going to be a very interesting and good channel. i'm talking about the news judgment when people want to devote, perhaps cnn, want to devote a large amount of time or space in the newspaper to a trial of this nature that isn't really advancing anybody's knowledge of anything, clearly they're doing it because it's scintillating, it's salacious, when, in fact, we're not devoting that kind of space to the noriega trial, to the s&l crisis. i'm not talking about you. i"m talking about news judgment, news gatherers, television and print. and i think that there's a question of what's left out when you decide to give something like this this much attention. 

well, you can't televise the noriega trial because cameras are not allowed in federal criminal courts. if we could, we would be there ahead of this trial, absolutely. 

and i think, as ellen says, and much of what we're talking about here is not so much, it's part certainly what court tv is doing, because your channel is devoted to covering trials like this, but also what cnn and what so many other news organizations are doing. ann lewis, as someone who is interested in politics and in the coverage of politics, what contribution do you think is made by the coverage of an event like this? 

well, look, the issues of sex and power have been attracting public attention since the iliad began, with perhaps the abduction of helen by paris. when you add to that the fact that this involves, as we've just heard, names that we've all been hearing about and reading about, that, of course, contributes to public interest. but i think this trial became a subject of public discussion long before the cameras started rolling, as soon as the first stories appeared in print. there's no question in my mind that we as a nation have spent more time as individuals in a workplace, at home, talking about issues like relations between men and women, talking about what is date rape. i am encouraged, i think, that there is higher sensitivity to these issues, that there is more concern about what is involved, about how widespread this may be, so that whatever the outcome of this trial may be, as in some other recent public events, i think we're all getting a little education today on changing currents. 

but you don't see that there's anything out of kilter with news coverage in general? i mean, we have, after all, an economic recession underway in this country. we have momentous changes happening in the soviet union, and yet, of course, we're devoting the discussion on this program tonight, but you have, again, the live coverage, the extensive coverage of when these other things are taking place. ellen. 

yes, that's exactly right. i think that it's true that it's not only crowding out other coverage, but there's an important point. in the old days, the lindburgh trial and all these other wonderful scandals that made so much hey day for the press, the press didn't have the same role in society that it does now. television and print press have become essential to the way our society receives its news about government. the church and the town crier don't have the same role they used to. it's now television that is our glue, our community, our culture. and when something is on television, it distorts the process enormously. and i think that while i wouldn't bar a trial, i think we have to have a free society. we have to be able to broadcast these trials. but i think that the news judgment in carrying them to the extent that they have been is skewed and is really a problem. 

steven brill. 

i would love toknow why the networks and cnn thought it was necessary to carry the clarence thomas-anita hill hearings when the subject was long dong silver, but not when the subject was the constitution. we did both. this is what we do. we do this for a living. so we, so our news judgment, you can compare the trials we cover, should we cover this, should we cover that, but we covered the murder trials in el salvador. we'll cover this. we cover high profile trials and try to teach people something, as ann pointed out, by virtue of the high profile trial. we lure people in and then try to teach them. 

ann lewis, what about that point, that there's something out of kilter, something unbalanced about news coverage in all this? 

well, i wonder if there is. if we could, for a moment, think about a dinner table with our friends and relatives and half the dinner you are discussing the break-up of the soviet union, which is really extraordinary, none of us has ever seen an empire dissolve before our eyes, and the second half perhaps we're talking about the palm beach trial. to the first, we can only talk as spectators about what we are watching thirdhand. to the second issue, we bring our own life experiences. we all have, if not experiences just like this one, we can talk about what we know, again, because it comes so much closer to home, because we may have children that have gone away to school that we're concerned about. it seems to me it comes closer, it is a different level of concern and we should not be surprised if those different human reactions also get reflected in news coverage. it's all one society. 

but does televising a trial, steven brill, affect whether justice is done in a case like this? i mean, is what we discussing totally separate from what happens with the outcome of this case? 

there are lots of issues here. the fact is that there are 46 states that will have cameras one way or the other and in each of those states they experimented first to see if the lawyers would ham it up, would the judge react differently, would jurors be intimidated? in every case after the experiment, they went forward. i think one of the great lessons of this trial is that we have a judge who clearly isn't hamming it up. she clearly is behaving the way we'd want any judge to behave. the lawyers clearly aren't hamming it up. whatever else you want to say about moira lasch, the prosecutor, you would be hard pressed to say that she's acting in a flamboyant way because the camera's there. she is as dull as she can be. it's clear the cameras haven't had any effect on her or on roy black. then the issue is whether a victim of something like a rape will come forward. and we have tried to deal with that i think responsibly by, as your viewers saw, by blocking out the name and by blocking out the same. we've done the same thing with the jurors. we haven't revealed the names of the jurors, even though we know them, even though florida law very much allows us to do it, because we don't want those people intimidated. 

and, again, you made the point as we were watching the tape, our tape, just before this, i said in that report that the reason the victim's face was blocked out was because of a florida law, and you've just corrected me and said that -- 

that law has been overturned as unconstitutional. indeed, it is unconstitutional. 

so it's the decision of the news organizations to block -- 

we have voluntarily decided at court tv to block that out. 

all right. susan xenarios, as someone who sees women day in and day out who come in and who say that they have been assaulted, been sexually assaulted, what effect do you think this has? 

well, i know that many of them are very, very disturbed. we see many survivors of date rape in our program. they will not come forth. and i think watching a trial like this can really be a detriment because i do disagree with mr. brill, i think that there are, this is not a typical rape trial, no. 1. i have testified on many rape trials and i have been present in many rape trials and, for instance, with undergarments being displayed in the courtrooms, that is not necessarily the normal state of affairs. reports, forensic reports, are given. they are not publicly displayed. i think that women who are contemplating prosecuting and taking this into the criminal justice system, they would really think twice. yes. 

i have to say i hear what you're saying and i sympathize with it, but -- and maybe ann lewis will agree with me on this -- but the most striking thing to me about the william kennedy smith trial is that all the myths about the horrid, horrible persecution of the alleged victim when she's on the witness stand and is cross-examined by the defense counsel just haven't happened. the judge very carefully proscribed -- let me continue -- what the defense counsel could ask. that questioning was tough. we saw that it was tough. but it did not go into the kinds of things in her personal life. it did not attack her in a personal way, the way mythologically we think is going to be the fate of alleged victims of rape. and i think, if anything, watching that, some victims might be encouraged to come forward, because it wasn't as bad as they heard it is. 

susan xenarios. 

i hear what you're saying and i think that they have been on basically good behavior, however, there have been an enormous number of expert testimonies that i think were tremendously irrelevant, you know, to the case. i think that things were allowed in the courtroom that would not normally be considered to be appropriate or relevant. 

in other words, showing the undergarments and so forth? 

yes. i think that's very denigrating. it's very humiliating. it's another way to rape to this woman. she is totally -- 

it's one rape. we don't know if she was raped the first time. 

that's correct. 

right? 

that's correct. 

the allegation. 

that's a very important point that we should not lose -- 

i'm not disagreeing with that. i'm just saying that your point is that what we're seeing, even though there has been a measure of restraint on the part of the prosecutor and the defense and so forth, there still is -- 

these are very difficult cases to prosecute and they are very difficult cases to experience as a victim of a rape, a date rape, or any rape. and i think what this has shown is the intrusiveness and the psychological violation and certainly, you know, she was, although she was able to explain her trauma, and i think in a very articulate way and why she remembers some things and doesn't remember other things, everything she said, every behavior she had is examined under a microscope. and that not only is hard enough in a courtroom that is private, let alone in international television. 

and you're saying that makes it harder for women who are out there? 

absolutely. 

ann lewis, how do you respond to that? 

well, i wonder, as i was listening, i certainly understand this issue of psychological violation. i've got to say as someone who've been reading, working towards better treatment of this whole issue of rape, we know that victims of rape, women who've had this problem, have been concerned for years justly because, for example, they were afraid that past sexual behavior would be used against them. i mean, rape has been the one crime where if you'd had sexual relations with someone, supposedly you were less able to protect yourself against rape, as if you could ever borrow money or let someone borrow money from you, you couldn't complain if they came back and stole it. what i have found is not reassuring, at least de-mystifying about this trial, is that those kinds of questions weren't raised. and i think it's important, since we're here talking about television and television coverage, that i found some stories that were written, for example, in the new york times, about the victim and her previous behavior to be much more intrusive than anything that i've seen. 

stories that appeared several months ago. 

that's right. so that we, in fact, had print stories that i thought were much more damaging and that lived up to the stereotype that victims or women who are concerned about rape, that's what they've been concerned about, just those kind of stories. we have not seen that in this trial. 

what about that? 

i would add we just talked about the anita hill- clarence thomas hearings. i think those hearings do, in fact, offer a model in that they brought into people's living rooms discussions that we had not previously had. our experience seems to be that since those hearings, women who've been troubled by sexual harassment are much more willing to step forward. so i'm hoping that ultimately this becomes an empowering experience. 

ellen hume. 

well, i think we're talking about a problem that is not just a televising of the trial which i do think creates a distortion in justice for both sides. but i also think we're talking about a broader problem of the kind of press attention, the spotlight, that is fixed upon both sides of the trial. and there are two trials going on. and in one, facts may matter, which is the jury trial, one hopes the jury examines the facts, but in the other, in television and print, it's more often image, hearsay, rumor and gossip that matter. and that's where i think the problem is with this kind of overkill coverage. 

the one place where you don't, in television where you don't have everything that ellen just described is if you're simply showing the trial. it's when you ambush people outside the courthouse steps is when you have the current affair reenacting the trial. it's when you have the new york times doing the piece it did that you have all that stuff. if you show the trial, you have exactly what you're talking about, ellen. 

but, of course, most americans, frankly, don't have the luxury or the time to be able to sit in front of a television and watch every single minute of the trial. susan xenarios, i just want to ask you, what about ann lewis's point that all of this has the effect of de-mystifying the process and should make women feel more comfortable? 

i would like to believe that that's true. i think in order to believe that, you also have to assume that we have a culture, a social structure, that does not stigmatize, thatdoes understand the trauma that rape victims do go through, that do have supportive services and a supportive criminal justice system. we don't. we have a culture that still stigmatizes. we have a culture that still punishes victims and blames victims. and i think we have to evolve to another step before we can really accept the fact that something like tv coverage will really de-mystify and then it won't be as big a problem anymore. 

ann lewis. 

i agree that the culture that susan began with is that's the world i want to live in, that's the world i want my daughters to live in. the question is: how do we get there? and i think it seems to me as i look at this trial, as i listen to the conversations i've heard this week, i had a woman say to me yesterday who works in washington that she and her friends have decided now to have a benefit for a rape crisis center in washington because they're convinced they've got to do more. i'm hoping we can see this discussion, this event, as steps toward that culture. we can't pretend it doesn't go on. we can't kid ourselves that we're already there. the issue is how do we get where we need to be. 

well, i hope you're right. i don't know how we get to where we need to be, other than people who have been doing the work that i've been doing have been doing this for ten, fifteen, twenty years now, and there are some times in my career that i feel very strongly we are ten years behind as well. 

well, susan xenarios, we thank you, steven brill, ellen hume, and ann lewis, thank you all. jim. 

still to come on the newshour tonight, complaints about credit reports. but first this is pledge week on public television. we are taking a short break now so your public television station can ask for your support. that support helps keep programs like this on the air. pledge break segment 

for those stations not taking a pledge break, the newshour continues with excerpts of a grim forecast about possible future events in the soviet union. the forecaster is cia director robert gates. he testified before the house armed services committee this morning. 

as the events of the past three days have demonstrated, nowhere is the progression of events more confusing, the pace of change more hurtling, or the conjunction of opportunities and dangers more evident than in the former soviet union, and nowhere is a favorable resolution, that is, the emergence of stable, friendly, competent democracies in russia, ukraine, and the other former soviet republics more vital to the interests of the united states, indeed, of the whole world. the communist old guard's suicidal attempt to turn back the clock last august, in fact, brought the prompt collapse of the soviet government and break-up of the country. the newly sovereign republics vary in political complexion and they seem to be interested in somehow coming together to form a very loose confederation, but none of them, either individually or collectively, has the desire or ability to pose as great a threat to u.s. security as did the ussr for so many decades. indeed, most republics of the former ussr are trying to reduce their defense burden, join western economic and security structures, and forge cooperative relationships with the united states. nevertheless, the situation is dangerously unstable. all of the former soviet republics face enormous economic, social, and political problems that will make the transition to democracy in a market economy difficult andpotentially dangerous. the economy is in a freefall with no prospects for reversal in sight. severe economic conditions, including substantial shortages of food and fuel in some areas, the disintegration of the armed forces, and ongoing ethnic conflict will combine this winter to produce the most significant civil disorder in the former ussr since the bolsheviks consolidated power. russian president yeltsin has articulated bold economic reform plans but it remains to be seen whether he can carry them out. market reform will be accompanied by inflation and unemployment that could generate a social explosion, endangering the stability of fledgling democratic governments. the possibility cannot be ruled out that such circumstances could produce a return to authoritarian government, whether led by reformers desperate to feed the people and stave off an explosion or by nationalists driven by a xenophobic, atavistic vision of russia. i'll now turn to the specific questions on military matters that you asked me to address. the threat from soviet conventional forces is shrinking daily. it is important though to distinguish between their near- term capabilities and their long-term potential. frankly, i cannot envision any realistic scenario in which a major conventional military threat to neighboring states would emerge from the former ussr within the next year or so. instead, as soviet leaders themselves have said, have warned, over the next year or two there may be greater possibility of conflict in or between various republics. such a conflict would probably be preceded by a period during which indicators such as increasing political turmoil or unbearable economic privation would provide some warning. longer-range forecasts should be made with great diffidence in the wake of the collapse of this huge empire and in the midst of the ensuing political, economic, and social revolution. yet, it is necessary both for us and for you to look beyond the next year or two. we must acknowledge the possibility that a new conventional military threat could re-emerge in former soviet territory, particularly in russia. of more immediate concern is the possibility that the soviets will not be able to maintain adequate safeguards in the process of reducing and dismantling much of their arsenal of 30,000 nuclear weapons. for now, the center retains control over those weapons through an elaborate and effective system operated by the ministry of defense and the general staff. but the center is evaporating before our eyes. those who designed the control system never anticipated this. focus - discredited 

finally tonight, a story about credit bureaus. today, one of the nation's largest, trw, settled a lawsuit with 19 states and the federal trade commission. among other things, trw had been accused of errors that unfairly lowered individuals' credit ratings. kwame holman reports on how these credit businesses work. 

america runs on credit. consumers owed $729 billion in non-mortgage debt alone at the end of august. a major factor making that debt possible is the credit reporting industry. it supplies instantaneous information on how 150 million americans pay their bills. that information is bought by stores, banks, even prospective employers to help them decide whether to offer credit, a mortgage loan, or a job to an individual. three giant credit reporting agencies, equifax cbi, trw, and trans union, dominate the billion dollar a year industry with roughly equal shares. criticized in the past, it's only because of the bad news they sometimes bear the credit bureaus have been under perhaps their most serious assault. 

these three companies operate at an oligopoly or monopolistic area and what that means in an economy is that they don't have any competition. if they don't have any competition, they stay fat and happy. the stockholders get big returns, the management gets plush offices and high salaries, and the consumers don't get what they deserve. 

ed mierzwinski of the public interest research group recently sampled 155 complaints about credit bureaus filed with the federal trade commission. 

we found that the credit bureaus don't seem to respond to consumer complaints. 63 percent of the consumers had already contacted the credit bureau five times or more without satisfaction. a full 100 percent of the cases, the average complaint had already gone on for six months without solution before the consumer contacted the government. 

the public interest research group's study also estimated a third of consumers have serious mistakes in their credit reports. another recent survey by the consumers union put the credit report inaccuracy figure at almost 50 percent. 

there is a serious problem. they have recklessly endangered the financial lives of consumers for a long time and we're going to have to do something about it. 

the consumers union study, by their own admission, is not a statistically valid study. us purg by its own admission said, hey, we drew a few reports of our own, of our own employees, and we found this, interesting, but anecdotal. 

barry connelly is a spokesman for associated credit bureaus, the trade group for the credit reporting industry. 

how about talking to the four or five million other americans who received disclosure of their file, found nothing wrong with it, and never spoke up, never said boo, that we never heard from? that's happening every day. so i don't think you can just say the industry is in disarray because of, because of a few anecdotal circumstances. 

it is a nightmare, an absolute nightmare. you feel so helpless. 

ursula daniels says a single mistake in her credit file has thrown her life into turmoil. 

my personal health has suffered. i have worried a lot about this because i am concerned about my credit rating. i had to get a second job to be able to pay my bills because i couldn't get credit anywhere. the manager downstairs in the credit union actually told me it was because of the bankruptcy notation on my credit report that they denied me credit. 

indeed, a bankruptcy appears on her credit report. the problem, says daniels, is that notation is completely inaccurate. 

i legally separated from my husband in 1986, in february. in 1986, in november of 1986, my husband declared personal bankruptcy and i was very much concerned at the time to make sure it does not affect me in any shape or form. he said, how can it, you have not signed any papers, i am doing this without your approval. 

daniels, a stenographer at the local power company in washington, d.c., wrote to equifax, the credit bureau that generated her file. daniels says two years of letters and calls have done nothing toward getting the bankruptcy notation corrected. 

it's like i'm banging my head on the wall. i don't know what to do. i can't afford a lawyer. it's been like a snowball. it's getting worse and worse and worse because of this bad thing on my credit report. 

florida businessman seymour shor says incorrect negative information remains in his credit files, despite his repeated efforts to get equifax and trw to change it. 

everybody's ignored me. if they ignore you, you can't argue or contest it. 

the file says he has a wife named dottie. shor, currently unmarried, says he doesn't even know a dottie. 

'58 or '59 was my last divorce. i was never married to a girl by the name of dottie. 

it says he holds delinquent accounts with discover card and a bank. shor says he never opened either account. 

you didn't open a discover card account or an american express card account? 

no. 

shor says the inaccuracies made it impossible to get the major credit card he needs. 

you believe that if the information in your equifax cbi file and in your trw file were correct, you would have been extended credit by mastercard, visa? 

yes, i believe so, because there's nothing detrimental. 

now, what's it meant to you that you don't have these major national credit cards? 

for example, one time my car had a minor mechanical repair, was in a mechanic's shop for two days, i was without transportation. i was going to rent a car, pay cash. they refused to rent me a car without a credit card. 

we told john baker, a senior vice president at equifax, about the complaints of seymour shor. 

i think it can still happen that a person may, one, have not been served properly, or that a person may disagree with the status of information in their file. 

but weeks after that interview, seymour shor said he still disagreed with the information in his equifax credit file that said he had two delinquent accounts. shor maintained he never opened the accounts and wanted to see equifax's evidence that he did. equifax wrote to the newshour that the accounts were verified with credit grantors. but shor now says the questionable accounts have been removed. as for ursula daniels, equifax wrote that the bankruptcy daniels claimed was inaccurate has been deleted from her report because equifax could not verify it. 

the focus of this hearing is the clear credit reporting act. 

in june, the controversy reached capitol hill. in hearings before a house subcommittee on consumer affairs, witnesses recounted horror stories brought on by credit bureaus. the hearings had been expected to produce new laws requiring the credit reporting industry to be more accurate and responsive to consumers. the legislation never got very far in this session of congress, but consumers won a victory today in a lawsuit against the trw credit bureau. it was filed last july by attorneys general from 19 states, charging trw didn't do enough to keep its data accurate and was slow to correct mistakes in consumers' credit files. under the terms of today's settlement, trw agreed to improve its information gathering procedures to prevent old or inaccurate data from reappearing in consumers' files. the company also agreed to investigate actively information challenged by consumers, check public records, if necessary, to verify the accuracy of data acquired, establish a toll free hotline for complaints, and disclose to consumers their individual credit rating starting in 1993. john baker of equifax says the credit reporting industry is on a course toward better service for consumers. 

i think if we do it right the first time, if we can tell people what the picture is of how they stand and what things they can do to improve their credit and why it is the way it is, we'll not only shorten our process and make it more effective and less hassle for the consumer, we'll improve the credit performance of a lot of people in society, and we'll help credit grantors who would like to see that happen. 

what effect the trw settlement will have on proposed regulation of the industry may be determined when congress returns. recap 

again, the major stories of this tuesday, cia director gates told congress the soviet union was dangerously unstable, there were reports soviet president gorbachev was about to resign. a top aide denied that report. and the mideast peace talks began again in washington. good night, judy. 

good night, jim. that's our newshour for tonight. we'll be back tomorrow night. i'm judy woodruff. thank you and good night.
