

good evening, i'm margaret warner. jim lehrer is off this week. on the newshour tonight, we'll look at president-elect bush's choice for secretary of defense, paul solman reports on a new breed of philanthropists who are changing the rules of the game, susan dentzer offers an update on the risks of cellular phones, and elizabeth farnsworth gets some historical perspective on the year 2000 from michael beschloss, haynes johnson, richard norton smith and roger wilkins. it all follows our summary of the news this thursday.

news summary

president-elect bush announced his nominee for defense secretary today. he's donald rumsfeld, a former white house chief of staff who was defense secretary under president ford. we'll have more on the rumsfeld pick right after the news summary. the first data from the year 2000 census, released today, show the u.s. population has jumped more than 13% since 1990 to more than 281 million people. the growth has come unevenly-- and that will cause a reallocation in the u.s. house of representatives. among the biggest changes, arizona, texas, georgia and florida will gain two seats each, while new york and pennsylvania will each lose two. all told, 18 of the 50 states will either gain or lose representatives. president clinton raised the federal budget surplus projection today-- to $1.9 trillion over the next decade. that's $300 billion more than the previous estimate, issued last summer. the president said the new figures mean the entire $5.6 trillion national debt could be paid off in nine years, if all of the surplus is used for that purpose. he spoke at the white house. 

i have often said that i believe we should use a portion of the surplus to make critical investments in education, provide a prescription drug benefit through medicare to our seniors and have a targeted tax cut. if the incoming administration and the new congress make such decisions, they could still get us out of debt early. 

president-elect bush has proposed a much bigger tax cut than mr. clinton advocates, some.$1.3 trillion over ten years. also today, the president said he has decided not to visit north korea before leaving office next month. he said there wasn't enough time to prepare the deal he sought, under which pyongyang would agree to stop producing ballistic missiles. in the middle east today, a bomb exploded on a bus in tel aviv, injuring 14 people. and two israelis were killed in an attack in gaza. we have a report from john irvine of independent television news. 

some of the victims of today's upsurge and violence: israeli soldiers injured in an ambush that killed two of their colleagues on the gaza strip. (ambulance sirens ) earlier, there were bomb explosions on a bus, as it traveled along one of the busiest roads in tel aviv. both attacks were probably the work of palestinian militants opposed to the peace process, and the violence was another setback on a day that had already seen the cancellation of a summit, between the israeli and palestinian leaders. the israeli prime minister, ehud barak, pulled out of that meeting, deciding it was pointless since the palestinians had not given a clear-cut response to american proposals, meant to be the basis for moving forward. yasser arafat, who's been with the egyptian president today, says the blueprint for peace is not detailed enough, and he wants clarification before accepting or rejecting it outright. 

president clinton condemned the attacks and said they showed the prospects for peace would not improve with time. he said he's still pursuing an agreement, but added "there is no point in our talking further unless both sides accept the parameters i have laid out."

montgomery ward said today it was closing its doors and filing for bankruptcy, after more than a century in the retailing business. founded in 1872, the chicago- based chain grew to more than 250 stores in 31 states and employed 37,000 people. the company said weak holiday sales made the decision unavoidable. montgomery ward is a subsidiary of general electric company. record cold and snow continued across the south, southwest and midwest today. 37 deaths are blamed on the storms, including 22 on texas highways. hundreds of thousands of people remain without power, and more storms are forecast. in texas, police and national guard troops had to rescue about 1,000 motorists stranded overnight by ice and snow on a highway near abilene. that's it for the news summary tonight. now it's on to another bush cabinet choice, giving away money with a purpose, an update on cellular telephones, and historical perspectives on the year 2000. 

focus - defense choice

a new boss for the pentagon. we start with a report from spencer michels. 

donald rumsfeld's appointment as secretary of defense is a unprecedented return engagement. it brings back to government-- at the age of 68-- a man who began serving in elective and appointed office in 1963, following a stint as a navy pilot. rumsfeld was elected to the first of four terms in congress, at the age of 30. under president nixon, he held several jobs, including ambassador to nato. when gerald ford became president, rumsfeld became chief of staff, and in 1975 he assumed the job of defense secretary -- the youngest in history. since leaving government, he worked as a business executive, most recently as chairman and ceo of general instrument corporation, a television technology firm. in announcing rumsfeld's appointment, mr. bush outlined his own goals for the nation's defense. 

one is to strengthen the bond of trust between the american president and those who wear our nation's uniform. secondly is defend our people and allies against missiles and terror. and thirdly is to begin creating a military prepared for the dangers of a new century. we hope to never send our troops into combat, but if deterrence were to fail, we must send them fully prepared and equipped for the dangers that they will face. secondly, to defend our forces and allies and our own country from the threat of missile attack or accidental launch, we must develop a missile defense system. i was most impressed by the chairman of the national commission's ballistic missile threats work. that chairman was don rumsfeld. i felt he did an extraordinary job with a delicate assignment. he brought people together to understand the realities of the modern world. our nation is positioned well to use technologies to redefine the military. and so, one of secretary rumsfeld's first tasks will be to challenge the status quo inside the pentagon, to develop a strategy necessary to have a force equipped for warfare of the 21st century. 

rumsfeld endorsed that blueprint for defense. 

it is clearly not a time at the pentagon for presiding or calibrating modestly. rather, we are in a new national security environment. we do need to be arranged to deal with the new threats, not the old ones, as you point out, with information warfare, missile defense, terrorism, defense of our space assets and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction throughout the world. history teaches us that weakness is provocative. the task you have outlined is to fashion deterrence and defense capabilities, so that our country will be able to successfully contribute to peace and stability in the world. 

mr. rumsfeld was asked how seriously he took the threat of a missile attack.

there's no question but that the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the delivery systems for them is extensive across the world. there is no question but that a number of nations are supplying other nations with elements that they need and assisting them in bypassing the normal period of years it would take to develop these capabilities. and i consider that, myself, to be a real threat. 

the president elect was asked what priority, in his first 100 days, he would give rebuilding the military. 

well, first, in my budget, i can assure you, there's going to be a military pay raise greater than the pay raise, which was enacted a year ago. and secondly, i've always believed that we're going to have a selling job to do on congress as to how to modernize the military. and that requires, first and foremost, a top-to-bottom-- a bottom-to-top review of what exists today and what the military ought to look like tomorrow. and that's going to be one of don rumsfeld's first jobs. 

mr. bush was also asked if, in addition to mr. rumsfeld, colin powell and vice president-elect cheney would have influence over the pentagon. 

one of the things that's really important for the american people to understand is, i'll be getting some of the best counsel possible. and so, you bet, general powell's a strong figure and dick cheney's no shrinking violet, but neither is don rumsfeld, nor condi rice. i view the four as being able to complement each other. there's going to be disagreements. i hope there is disagreement, because i know that disagreement will be based upon solid thought. and what you need to know is that if there is disagreement, i'll be prepared to make the decision necessary for the good of the country. 

president-elect bush has several more cabinet nominations to make-- a process he says he hopes he can finish by the first week in january. 

for more on the rumsfeld choice, we go to: james woolsey, a former cia director and navy undersecretary who served on the missile defense commission chaired by rumsfeld; retired general george joulwan, who was supreme allied commander of nato when nato sent troops into bosnia; and john isaacs, president of the council for a livable world, an arms control advocacy group. 

welcome, gentlemen, and general, what do you make of this choice? 

i think it's an excellent choice. i have watched don rumsfeld for many years. he brings great experience, not only in the business world, but in his experience in nato and the middle east. and i believe he's going to provide management and leadership to the pentagon and developing this strategy he talks about, which i think is absolutely necessary, with the president and the national security team. i believe don rumsfeld was going to be a key element of that team. 

what does the choice tell but bush's priorities that maybe we didn't know before? 

well, i think he's putting a very strong priority on the defense and the military. and don rumsfeld's a heavyweight that he's bringing in to this team and i think he's going to have a seat, a big seat at this table, and i think that is very good for soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines and also for the country in trying to define this security strategy for the 21st century, absolutely essential. 

how do you see it, john isaacs? 

donald rumsfeld certainly is a heavyweight, about you he also is a pretty hard line character. i mean, he's one of the high priests of national missile defense, the chairman of the commission that talked about the missile defense... the threat from rogue nations of missiles. he posed the comprehensive test ban treaty that the senate voted on in 1999, which was consistent with president-elect bush, but he also opposed and testified against the chemical weapons convention, which the first president bush actually negotiated an he posed start ii agreement. so he's been pretty hard line on arms control. it'll be interesting to see what he does as secretary of defense. 

what do you think of the choice and what do you think it says about president-elect bush's priorities? 

i think it's an excellent choice. i think don rumsfeld is a very talented and successful individual and i think it says that president-elect bush is willing to have strong-willed, able people around him. he is not one of these people who takes comfort from having yes men or women around him. these are four remarkable people, his national security team. 

the usual perception is that republican comes in, that means they're going to beef up defense. but when you hear that both what he and donald rumsfeld talked about, it sounded like there was also quite a reform agenda -- he talked about changing the pentagon, changing the military. explain what that means to you, jim woolsey.

well, there are changes that need to be made. but a lot of what you need to do in the pentagon when you're not fighting is prepare to fight. and that's largely the battle of the budget. there are savings that can be made -- a lot of them through i think base closures and contracting out. but often congress fights those because it runs up against constituent interests in various districts. the problem he's going to face is that, in addition to improving readiness, which has been run down somewhat from all of the peacekeeping deployments, and improving personnel and quality of life for the soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, which is going to cost money because the civilian economy's doing so well, we're losing pilots in droves, for example, he's going to need to recapitalize the pentagon because a lot of the equipment, the tanks, the ships, the aircraft that were bought early in the reagan administration are now coming up toward the end of some of their useful life. and we've had kind of a spending holiday on procurement for the last eight years, and somebody's going to have to make that up. so i think he's going to have to spend, even with savings, tens of billions of dollars a year more on the pentagon than is now being spent. we'll still be at an all time low as with a share of the gnp going to defense, but in absolute terms, that'll be a substantial increase, and he's going to have a hard time getting some of that i think through this very divided congress. 

what do you make, general, of this language about, you know, challenge the status quo in the pentagon and modernizing the military? what do you think bush and rumsfeld are really talking about, and what's the resistance to it? 

well, first of all, i've heard a consistent theme by the president-elect, by secretary of state, the national security designee and by the secretary of defense designee, and that is: what is needed is some sort of clarity of mission. what is it you want the pentagon, what do you want the military to do? and this clarity i think is absolutely essential as we approach this multitude of threats that we have in the 21st century, but more important are the opportunities that we have. how do we work with our allies? how do we consult not just inform? we have this opportunity of leadership, and i think don rumsfeld and this team provide a great opportunity to develop those with our allies and with our partners and our friends and send a clear message to our adversaries.

which is... 

which is that the united states is going to participate, is going to provide that leadership and is going to redesign or adapt our military to meet threats that we face in the 21st century. 

and, john isaacs, how do you read the language about readapting, challenging the status quo? 

well, what the president talked about and what rumsfeld talked about is preparing for the kind of challenges we will face in the next decade and next decades. but that does not include building a lot of these what other people call the legacy weapons, the weapons really were designed to confront the soviet union during the cold war. and president-elect bush talked about skipping generations of weapons, and that could mean challenging some of the major weapons programs within the pentagon, perhaps the joint strike fighter, the f.-22 for the air force plane, the f-18-ef for the navy, and if rumsfeld and bush actually want to tackle this, they're going to tackle major constituencies in congress and major bureaucracies in the pentagon, and i don't know whether that team and whether rumsfeld is strong enough to do that. 

do you agree with that, general, about the constituencies? i mean, somebody's ox is going to get gored if you're really changing things. 

i think you need to set the strategy and that's the president, has to set that strategy for his national security team and soon. and then what follows from that strategy are the procurement items that need to be developed and the training and the readiness, all of that follows the strategy. but until you have that clarity, it's very hard to say what constituencies are going to be... 

don't build this or don't build that? 

and that's been part of our problems that we've had, to me, in the past. and i think the president and his team early on need to set that strategy and set those priorities. 

what do you make of, one, how extensive a reforming, revamping job lies ahead; and whether rumsfeld is well-equipped to do this, having worked so closely with him on that mission? 

i think he's superbly equipped to do it. he's a good leader, he's firm. he manages by his out box, not his in box. but he has a very good sense of humor.

explain that. he manages by... 

he sets priorities, he sets deadlines, he imposes, i think, his structure on an organization. but he is a man who tolerates disagreement well; he likes to have argument. he has a very good sense of humor, and that makes things i think go better. i think the problem is that the period we're in now is a period in which the threats are not clear. we may need to deal with china in the taiwan straits, we may need to deal with north korea coming in -- south korea and we may need to deal with iraq coming against kuwait again. the situation is much more to the way it was say in the '20s or early 1930's after we had won world war i. that this time we won the cold war, but there isn't a single threat. so although we can hope for clarity in the sense of being precise about what we're trying to do, we can't really hope for clarity in picking a single foe and organizing to defeating him the way we did in the cold war.

now, national missile defense, john isaacs, you mentioned this originally when we went around and so did the president-elect. does this signal to you that bush is really serious about pushing this? and what difference can it make if a donald rumsfeld is defense secretary? 

i don't think there's any question that the president and his team is committed to national missile defense. although that does not necessarily mean that they are committed to deployment anytime soon. if you listen to the president-elect's word today, he said, "we're going for a missile defense system that works." and one thing that's clear today is that there's no missile defense system that works. 

the technology isn't there? 

the technology is not ready. moreover, the republican party has a split between those who want to build the bill clinton missile defense system, starting with land-based deployment in alaska, and then expand from there perhaps to missile defense at sea and in space, and those including i believe jim woolsey who say let's junk the clinton plan and started all over again and build an expanded system in sea and in space. and i don't know where rumsfeld stands on this, but this is not going to be an easy decision for the republican party and for this administration. 

weigh in on this, jim woolsey. 

i think we do need to move to a national missile defense. 

you mean of the kind that bush sketched out? 

well, he hasn't been precise yet about exactly what he was going to do, but i do think the clinton administration system was badly conceived. the mid course system that clinton proposed really is trying to hit a bullet with a bullet. it's the hardest way to do missile defense. 

i guess what i'm really asking is: what's your sense of where donald rumsfeld is on that? 

i don't know. the only thing i'm confident on is that he'll look at it objectively, hear the best arguments and make a clear recommendation to the president. i think he'll be very business like about it. i think he is committed, as i take it the president-elect is, to having a national missile defense, but what kind i don't know. 

but he would have a real sales job with, for instance, our european allies, wouldn't he, general joulwan? 

absolutely. but again, this is the consultation that i talk about not just information. the europeans would call it theater missile defense, and there is a proposal, an initiative in nato to study that. so i think if we have the leadership here, that this new administration can consult with our allies on their theater missile defense, as we also talk about national missile defense, as well. 

finally, john isaacs, how do you think rumsfeld will fit into this team? you have of course colin powell, secretary of state, condi rice, national security advisor, dick cheney, the 800-pound whatever, former defense secretary. there was a lot of question about whoever took this job, would they be overshadowed? what's your sense of rumsfeld and his ability to go toe to toe? 

well, i think rumsfeld is a pretty strong figure, he will be able to go toe to toe with the team. but there's a real potential for major divisions within this administration. when you're force when you force such strong figures, what you need is a very strong president to make the decision to choose between the options presented by the different teams, and this is not president-elect bush's strongest field, shall we say mildly. and so if there is a disagreement, i'm not sure who's going to settle it, unless it's condoleezza rice, the national security advisor elect or select. 

president-elect bush said he hoped there would be disagreements. do you see -- where do you see the fault lines or do you see any fault lines in this team potentially. 

i'm not sure there will be any continuing fault lines. they'll disagree on things because they're all smart and people of forceful will. but the interesting thing is that colin powell and condi rice both have a reputation and have explicitly said they're reluctant to use u.s. troops abroad, more reluctant than the clinton administration has proven to be. and often the secretary of defense is the one who says, "look, i'm not really sure we want to use force. here are the criteria, here is why it could be difficult." the secretary of defense often is sort of dragged along in many administrations to using force if you... 

whereas it's usually the secretary of state who's saying, "get in there."

sometimes that's the case. it'll be interesting to see if that's what happens here and if so, you'll have everybody reluctant to use force here. it's my hunch that these people are pragmatic enough that each case is going to be on its own merits and you'll have a lot of vigorous discussion among strong-willed people. the president will make the final decision. 

do you see that possibility, general, that you could have a team of reluctant warriors? 

well, i think just the opposite. i think you're going to get from both the state department and defense department, particularly with someone like colin powell who understands what conditions you need before you commit forces, you're going to find someone that's going to fight diplomatically to get those conditions, to work with our allies, to make sure you have rules of engagement, for example, that can work before you commit the force. so i see a sympathetic ear in the state department and a don rumsfeld who's very strong that's going to insist on those conditions before we commit the force. so i really see not so much argument as much as complementing one another on the vital issue of when you commit forces.

can i say something on that? this is an area with potential major disagreement with our european allies. the specific test case in the first year is whether u.s. troops remain in bosnia and kosovo. during the campaign, president-elect bush talked about getting u.s. troops out. well, the european allies say, "we have 80% of the troops there -- the u.s. should have a major role there, too." and i don't know where rumsfeld and powell and the whole team are going to come down. so both missile defense and troops in the former yugoslavia are major areas of potential disagreement. 

i know you want to jump in -- very briefly. 

yes, that's where consultation comes in. the europeans are building a european force. there's a great opportunity, i think, it can be a win-win with what we would like to do in 

the united states and what our european allies can do. we need to consult with them. 

all right, and we have to leave it there. thank you all three very much. 

focus - making money count

still to come on the newshour tonight, the changing face of philanthropy, a cell phone update, and some perspective on the year 2000. business correspondent paul solman of wgbh, boston, looks at a new breed of philanthropists. 

these future leaders are inner city kids attending a privately run after school program called citizen school. 

you want the skills, you want the leadership, but you think access to good jobs, good mentors, good high school opportunities... 

the citizens, volunteer experts, come in to teach everything from city planning to law... 

what kind of files are they? 

...computers to cooking. 

we've got our bruchetta out of the oven now. 

kids who say they'd otherwise be on the street, or home watching cartoons, are here after school every day learning serious skills. 

new worlds. 

new worlds. 

in short, time-honored social activism. one of those thousands of nonprofit points of light. but, the people funding this operation, sure don't sound like typical social activists. 

it's so hard to grow a social innovation. 

it's put our full profit investor head on head on. 

you have to start building your capacity. 

going to scale by spreading your best practices. 

you have to start building your capacity. 

going to scale by spreading your best practices. 

i want to incentivize people to do better. 

price wars, competition, marketing strategies, all of that good stuff. 

yes, those women were social activists, but they sound an awful lot like hard-core businesspeople. actually, they're both. kelly fitzsimmons and vanessa kirsch run an outfit called new profit inc., and are using concepts and cash from the dot- com revolution to try to revolutionize philanthropy. and if you, like me, are currently sorting through the ton of plaintiff charity solicitations that come through the mail slot this time of year, and not knowing how to choose among them, you, too, might think a revolution was in order. 

imagine if we were starting a new profit sector, a sector that was devoted to trying to help social issues and social problems in our society, but that was using the principles of a marketplace, and of competition, and of performance and of rewards and accountability. 

what we do is we have opted to produce and create a new type of funding that we call venture philanthropy. we've taken cues, practices, ideas, approaches, from venture capital. 

venture philanthropy organizations are popping up nearly everywhere and gave $40 million in grants last year -- only a fraction of the $190 billion charitable giving industry, but a growing fraction that addresses one of the common woes of conventional charity. traditionally, foundations fund small, needy programs for short periods of time -- as vanessa kirsch herself found out, when she ran a small nonprofit that started to lose its funding, just as it started to take off. 

the foundation started saying, "you know, you're too big. you can't grow so fast," or, "we can't give you money. you're too successful." and i'm thinking, well, what? how can you ever grow something if... i mean, what, i'm supposed to be not successful? 

new profit inc. 

from that experience, kirsch and fitzsimmons created new profit, inc., a foundation that raises money from a pool of wealthy new donors to finance a small group of social entrepreneurs who are aching to expand their programs. new profit offers sustained funding, $1 million or more spread over several years, and provides hands-on business help, as well. social entrepreneur ned rimer, co-founded citizen schools, where he, too, uses business school skills to work on his ambitious goal of taking the program nationwide. 

i could have described citizen schools as an after school program in boston, period. but that's different than what we're trying to do. we really are trying to change the way kids grow up in this country. 

planning and architecture... 

making change on a national scale. you hear that a lot in the word of venture philanthropy. you also hear a lot about measurable results, because that's what the dot-com donors believe in. 

more buildings so people could live in there. 

our donors, this new generation, they're not charity, they're not... it's not about charity; it's about investment. it's just about investment in the nonprofit sector, and they do expect results, and they do want to see accountability.

well, it certainly sounds good, but wait a second. results in the for-profit sector are easy enough to measure, in profits. but how do you measure the results from nonprofit social activism? 

paul, you can measure anything. 

robert kaplan is co-creator of the balance scorecard, a system that firms like mobil oil have adopted sometimes to considerable advantage. the balance scorecard forces organizations to clearly define their goals then come up with a set of measures, the scorecard, to track progress and in meeting them. one of mobil's goals for its retail gas division, was to provide customers with a fast, friendly experience at the pump.

and they put that on the scorecard, and they measured it, you know, the nature of the buying experience. and every employee understood that this is the way the company needed to succeed. and somebody deep in the organization, in the marketing technology group is thinking, "can we produce this little device that people can carry on their key chains," which he calls, you know, a speed pass, "and they can just go up to the gasoline pump and it you press it against that, and it says, "hey, it's bob kaplan, charge it to his credit card." 

speed password for mobil; the scorecard got the credit. kaplan realized the balance scorecard might help define goals and measure results in the nonprofit world, as well. 

i mean i get solicitations, as i'm sure you do, from nonprofits all the time. they keep telling you what they do. you know, we're going to do this program, we're going to do this initiative, and i never see on the solicitation what have they achieved? how do i know whether they've been successful? what difference have they made in people's lives? not anecdotes, but measures. completely missing. 

i can tell you that i was debating somebody, a foundation about the different models, and they said, "we have 100% success rate." and i said, "based on what, like how do you know?" "well, we gave all the money away." that was their definition of success. 

to prove to donors that their programs make a measurable difference, fitzsimmons and kirsch worked with kaplan to adapt the balance scorecard. new profit, inc., and all the groups it funds, must show that their scores improve year to year or risk losing funding. 

i think we'd all really appreciate your feedback. 

citizen school's scorecard, for example, includes improving students' skills, increasing the number of volunteers. 

wasn't that delicious? 

another group funded by new profit is jumpstart, which provides tutoring for low-income pre-schoolers. ceo aaron lieberman. 

there's a lot of research that suggests, for kids who are prepared when they get to kindergarten, they'll likely be successful for the rest of their life in terms of being able to get the most out of school, go on to high school, college and so forth. 

now you're up here on an individual kid. 

at a pre-school outside boston, we were shown an internet-based program jumpstart had created to help teachers update parents about their children's progress. in a good example of the new market approach, jumpstart has now formed a for-profit spin-off company to sell the program to private schools like this one.

it'll be great for the children and the core members in jumpstart, and they'll always be able to use these tools. but we realize there's also a market for this and we can sell this to the larger public and create a company in which jumpstart is the leading shareholder. it's a true new profit. 

now, all this talk of profits raised another question: the social entrepreneurs we talked to were bright folks with glitzy business credentials who could be making much more money in the for-profit sector. so how much salary should a person be expected to sacrifice to work for the public good? ned rimer acknowledged the key reward of most social activists. 

psychic income and i think it's huge. it's being able to see the impact you're having on a community to me is worth a lot of dollars. 

but new profit co-founder kelly fitzsimmons says, that if you want to attract and keep top people to run productive social enterprises, you should pay them competitively. 

i guess the medium sized nonprofit organization, we should be paying people that are running those things six-figure salaries. and maybe, you know, in the lower end of the six figures. 

when you say six figures, you mean $200,000 a year? 

or $100,000, $100,000 to $200,000. 

fitzsimmons makes $100,000 a year. the social entrepreneurs she funds for the moment make considerably less. historically, of course, donors have been reluctant to give money if they thought salaries were too high, but that may be changing. venture philanthropists after all, have a new model designed to achieve the loftiest of ambitions. 

i want to say that we can end hunger in america, and i don't think that is impossible. with the kind of money and resources and intellectual capital we have in america, we should be able to solve major social problems. 

who would argue with that? well, peter karoff, long time advisor to donors and philanthropists worries that the ambition behind venture philanthropy has a downside. 

where you make a mistake is where you overstate and you make statements like, "we're going to completely eliminate illiteracy in america today," and then five or seven, eight years from now you haven't done it. and what you've done again is raise expectations, you've been like the politicians, beyond the ability to execute. 

so now, if we look at it on here, though... 

but ultimately, the work of any social enterprise is the effect it has on people's lives. so we conducted our own perhaps unbalanced scorecard, a casual survey on what kids were getting out of citizen schools. 

if i was to sit here and talk to you before, say four years ago, i couldn't do it, couldn't do it because i would just get all extra shy, i'd be like, "oh, my god." i wouldn't be able to speak, i wouldn't be able to form a proper sentence. 

how does it prepare you for later in life? 

we had a stock market/business class where our teacher showed us how to do stock market. he showed us how to use it. i was like, "wow, that's easy." then' said, "okay, now, everybody's going to have to take a certain stock and we have to follow it from now until the end of the semester. so i took microsoft. my stock is up to $14,1700 and 53 cents.

microsoft's been taking a beating lately. are you aware that have? 

yes. 

it could be down. 

microsoft leads to a last point about venture philanthropy's promise -- to bring to charity, says robert kaplan, the dynamic growth of the profit-seeking sector. 

half of the top companies, microsofts, intels, home depots have occurred since 1967. you look at the same statistics, which are the larger social service organizations. in the top 25, maybe one or two has been created since 1967. and new profit, inc., is trying to, through this venture capital, you know, create the microsofts and the intels and the cisco systems of the social sector. 

in other words, venture philanthropy is trying to incubate the new superstars of the nonprofit sector. it's a presumptuous goal, and a major challenge to how the business of philanthropy currently works. 

update - cell risks

there's some new research on whether cell phones pose health risks. correspondent susan dentzer of our health unit updates the story. the unit is a partnership with the henry j. kaiser family foundation. (phone ring ) 

more than 90 million americans and at least half a billion people worldwide, depend on cellular phones to stay in close touch but as cell phone use has grown, so have concerns that the radio frequency signals that carry sound from phone to phone could have adverse health effects. there have been fears that signals emitted from the antennas of hand-held cell phones could cause brain cancer, or that the signals could cause genetic damage in human blood. for example, several high- profile lawsuits have been filed alleging damage from cell phones. last summer, a maryland neurologist asked for $800 million in damages against motorola and verizon, charging that his cell phone use had caused brain cancer. that case is now pending. and in a recent book that garnered media attention, one researcher, dr. george carlo, claimed that he had found evidence linking cell phone use to both brain cancer and genetic damage to blood cells. but in contrast to some users' fears, and to concerns raised by carlo and a handful of other researchers, two new studies suggest no statistical link between cell phone use and brain cancer. the first, published last week in the "journal of the american medical association," compared a group of 469 men and women with brain cancer with a slightly smaller group of people without the disease. 66 of the cancer patients reported using handheld cellular telephones for an average of just under three years, as did 76 of the patients who were well. a statistical analysis showed no connection between brain cancer and cell phone use, says joshua muscat, the lead researcher in the study. 

we found that regardless of how frequently the phones were used per month or how many years that the phones were used, there wasn't any relationship with the developments of brain cancer. 

not only was there no apparent link to cancer, there was also no indication that cancers appeared more often on the side of the head where patients tended to use the phones -- that seemed to strengthen the case that the phones' radio frequency signals weren't harmful. 

radio frequency waves are low-energy waves. they are not like x-rays, which have been shown to cause genetic damage. they don't produce any harmful physiological effects that we know of. 

a second, even larger study by researchers at the national cancer institute yielded similar results. in this one, to be published in january in the "new england journal of medicine," examined the cases of 782 hospitalized patients with various forms of brain cancer; they compared them to 799 other hospital patients with no brain cancer. of the two groups, 311 of the brain cancer patients had used cellular phones, versus 359 of those who were cancer-free. once again, researchers found no evidence of increased risk of cancer from cell phone use. despite the new studies' seemingly good news, even the researchers who conducted them warned that it was far too soon to grant cell phone use a completely clean bill of health. 

cell phones have only been around for a few years and so most people who have used cell phones have used them on average for about two or three years. we need to keep in mind that there might be unknown effects associated with longer usage, and so that needs to be studied in the future. 

meanwhile, cell phone producers have started to disclose just how much radiation 

their phones emit. these are stated in terms of so- called "sars," or specific absorption rates, that indicate the number of watts of radiation the body absorbs for each kilogram of weight. although no one really knows what level is safe, for now the federal communications commission has set a maximum sar of 1.6 for cell phones. you can determine your phone's rating by locating its fcc id number on the back, and then looking up the matching sar on the fcc internet page. people worried about cell phone use can also take precautions. one is to avoid using a phone inside a building or wherever the signal is weak, since this requires the phone to emit more radiation. cell phone users can also get external antennas for their cars, or use portable, hands-free headsets like this one with the phone held as far as possible away from the body. and some experts say it makes sense for now to avoid long cell phone chats-- at least until more cell phone safety research produces more definitive results in the future.

finally - looking back

finally tonight, some historical perspective on the year 2000 and to elizabeth farnsworth. 

we look back at this year with newshour regulars presidential historian michael beschloss and journalist and author haynes johnson. joining them are presidential biographer and historian richard norton smith, and historian roger wilkins of george mason university.

richard, from a historical point of view, what was significant about this past year?

well, of course i'm tempted to answer the election. it was certainly the most memorable event of the year, although in an odd kind of way, it wasn't the election so much as what followed the election. but in fact, we won't know for several years whether the election of 2000 is the most historically significant or influential event. one thing we know happened this past year that will cast a very long shadow for centuries to come and that was the mapping of the human genetic code, which, by the way, ultimately will also affect our politics because, as we get closer to a culture of man-made man, there are bound to be a host of ethical, spiritual, moral and, yes, political issues, some of which could make the current controversy over abortion look relatively tame.

haynes, do you have another choice for the most significant event of the year? 

well, it's weird because we haven't precast us at all. we never know what we're going to say to each other -- but that's exactly what i would say. if you're in washington, incestuous as it is, you'd say the election. but i don't think that's the most important thing. i think we might look back on this time and say this was the year in which the boom seemed to end, when the bubble was in danger of bursting, affecting the long-term economy. but i think overshadowing that, i agree with richard, the long-term ramifications of this stunning advancement in genetics, which is going to change everything in life and affect us profoundly in the future. 

and, roger, even though you've lost a wisdom tooth, do you still have enough wisdom to come up with an answer to this question? 

well, since it almost all leaked out, i would say that the thing that concerns me most is the incredible meltdown of the $100 million washington football team. 

really? 

but beyond that, i have been terribly troubled by the renewal of the hostilities in israel and the war between the palestinians and the israelis. you know, when i was in high school out there in grand rapids where richard is, ralph bunt was negotiating a truce between the palestinians and the israelis, and we were thinking that it was going to last forever, that the u.n. would monitor it, there would be peace. and every time you seem to touch the peace, you find a truth, that the haters control the veto button. and every time you almost get peace, it explodes. and i think that that tells us something really profound, not just about the middle east, but about ourselves as human beings, that we horde our grievances and occasionally they explode. 

michael beschloss, what do you say is the most significant event of the year? 

well, you know what? while i'm listening to all this, elizabeth, it reminds me of something, which is that in the 1960s, when john kennedy suggested that we americans land a person-- he said a man on the moon by 1970, a lot of people said, "you know, $20 billion to land a man on the moon, it was really in many ways a waste of money." but you know, that was the view that people had from that perspective. many people think, and i think it's very possible, that 500 years from now, we may look back -- it won't be any of us, unfortunately -- but people might look back on the 20th century and say that a human being on the moon was the most important thing, or one of them, that human beings did. but since we're dealing only with a more limited perspective tonight, i'd say the election of 2000 in one sense, and that is that this is the first election since 1928 where, thank god, we were not electing a president under the shadow of an international emergency, like the cold war or world war ii or an economic crisis like the recession even of 1992, and that's a wonderful thing. but the downside of that is that it makes presidents less powerful. we're at the end of the period that arthur schlessinger called, the imperial presidency, and i think as the first post-imperial president, george w. bush has his work cut out for him. 

richard, respond to that. and also, what in the elections can you say now will be most lasting? what about the process or the way it was covered? 

well, that's a great question, elizabeth, because i was going to say the non-story of the year is a wonderful subtext for the election and the way we covered the election. remember y2k and doomsday? well, it never happened. what happened was hype. and hype has infected not only the popular culture; in many ways, it's also infected the way we cover our democracy itself. we've known for a long time that politics has been looked at as a horse race, that's fine. this year it seems to me was the first election in which we paid less attention to the horses than we did to the handicappers, to the spin doctors and the focus groups and all of the special pleaders who shouted at each other as if you test democracy by decibel level. i think that's worrisome. i think there's a trivialization, i think there's an element of the media which are interested in conflict over conflict resolution. and in many ways the legitimate media, the mainstream media, are beginning to take their message from the fringe. i mean the newshour is a wonderful oasis. my concern is that the desert is getting bigger.

haynes, when you look at the elections and all of this past year's politics, what do you see that's most lasting? 

well, i think that certainly it's true about the media, but that's a long-term process. it's not new. we have been going through this cycle after cycle. it does increase. it's serious, and it's troubling. but i think what this election really told us was that the system fundamentally wasn't working at the very grassroots of democracy. now, it worked in the sense we talked on this show before, and that we all got a lesson in what our system is, its strengths, and the strengths are manifold. but it also -- we got a lesson that there were fundamental ways in which we don't vote equitably. the more we learn about how the votes were counted, it's a real challenge on not just the new administration -- on the entire society, to make it fair. that's the essence of democracy. and that if you don't believe in it to be fair, then i think you have a serious long-term problem. 

roger wilkins, your last remarks made me think that your looking at this past year is confirming a somewhat not negative but not optimistic view of human nature. 

well, yes, and i saw part of that in the election. i would say two good things happened in elections: mexico got a new president and got rid of the old party that had been in power for 70 or 80 years; and slobodan milosevic is halfway off the stage. both of those are to the good. but the part of our election that really troubled me was the dubious integrity of the supreme court's jurisprudence. you go back... it is hard to look at that five-person majority's judgment and not conclude with justice stevens that one thing is certain, that the integrity of the judicial process has been hurt here. and i haven't seen a decision which seemed so devoid of jurisprudential integrity since the old post-civil war supreme court decisions which tried to slam blacks back into semi slavery. so i would say that this judicial intrusion into the electoral process was deeply troubling. 

richard, before we move off the politics, you want to respond to that? 

well, i certainly respect roger's viewpoint. i think the other perspective would be that the court saved the country from another month of what was rapidly escalating polarization with the likely same result, two sets of election returns perhaps going to washington, having a deeply divided congress, possibly even having al gore himself cast the deciding vote. i'm not sure if that would have been much worse. 

michael, before we... actually, i want to move on to foreign affairs now. you heard what roger said about the middle east. what would you consider most significant in what happened outside of this country? 

well, one thing was last march we saw for the first time in a millennium, a democratic transfer of power in russia to vladimir putin, who was elected to a four-year term as president, which is a wonderful thing, exactly what many of us americans had been dreaming of all through the cold war. this is the kind of system that we wanted to see in russia. but at the same time, this is a putin who's going to be much tougher for a new american administration than was boris yeltsin, someone who wants to make russia strong, possibly conceivably an economic rival, military rival, political rival to the united states. and the result is that i think we may see that putin's ascendancy is the end of this odd period of the last eight or nine years where americans were not very interested in foreign affairs and nor were presidents.

and haynes, what's your choice for a foreign story? 

i think the middle east, as roger said earlier. i think it's not that it's a new story. obviously, it's thousands of years old. and the trouble is it keeps sinking in the same morass, and it never seems... you keep coming up with the hope that something's going to happen, and it is a testament-- and roger said it better than i can-- to man's inhumanity to man. we just don't seem to be able to get it together at the last minute when we need to, and i think that's the thing that's most depressing. russia is a serious question on the world horizon, if it's falling apart. and i think i'd also add that china's emergence is going to be looked at in years to come as a great story. 

and, roger, anything else you want to add about foreign stories? 

oh, yeah. it's that we finally understand how devastating aids in africa is, and we're looking at the rest of the world and saying, "can we muster"... "we've got the money, we've got the technology, can we muster the humanity to help?" that's the story for last year and the issue for this coming year. 

richard, your foreign story? 

well, you know, it's interesting. roger mentioned vicente fox, whose election in itself is a real landmark for hemispheric democracy and a cause for celebration. and if he succeeds, that success will have real implications for this country, as well. he is just starting his career on the world stage. let me pick as a man of the year a man who is clearly near the end of his time on the world stage, and that's the pope. this year of course was the holy year in the catholic church, highlighted by a very emotional pilgrimage to the middle east. this is a man who, after 22 years on the throne of st. peter, clearly a man of diminished strength but undiminished moral stature, continues really to tower over his contemporaries. and because he confronted successfully almost every kind of evil that human kind or technology could conjure up in the old century, i think he'll continue to be an influence well into the new one. 

and michael, we have very little time left, but the rest of you, please tell me who you'd have as your man or woman of the year. 

i think you can't do better than the holy father. and george bush of course was on the cover of a news magazine named "time" this past year. the interesting thing is that this election was so divided -- we were this year, that that was sort of a close call. 

and, roger, man or woman of the year? 

oh, i wouldn't descent from richard's choice, but if i had to pick a second one, it would be tiger woods. ( laughter ) 

haynes, who's your choice? 

well, would i add someone we haven't talked about, craig ventner, who was the person who led the breaking of a genetic code, mapping of the human life that's going to change us so much. in the long run, he may be the most influential in the future. 

well, happy new year to all of you. thanks. 

recap

again, the major stories of this thursday, president-elect bush nominated donald rumsfeld for defense secretary. and the first data from the year 2000 census show the u.s. population has jumped more than 13% since 1990, to more than 281 million people. we'll see you on-line and again here tomorrow evening with shields and brooks, among others. i'm margaret warner. thanks for being with us. good night.
