

good evening. leading the news this wednesday, nicaragua's sandinista government declared a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the contras. the supreme court issued two rulings -- [network difficulty] -- the shuttle was successfully launched after five attempts. we'll have details in our news summary in a moment. jim. 

after the news summary, kwame holman [news maker] interviews the defeated president of nicaragua, daniel ortega. we have a debate over using criminal charges [focus - exxon - facing charges] against corporations such as exxon. the debaters are lawyers robert adler and richard samp. and then two views [focus - negligent treatment] of a new report on medical malpractice. they are those of new york state health commissioner david axelrod and lawyer dr. harvey wachsman. news summary 

nicaragua's sandinista government today declared a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the u.s.-backed contras. president daniel ortega said the decision was made to achieve the immediate de-mobilization of the contras. in an exclusive interview with the newshour, mr. ortega was asked by correspondent kwame holman what would be the consequences if the contras did not disband.

[speaking through interpreter] that's extremely serious because that threatens all of the security of the entire country. well, as long as i'm president, i'm going to take whatever measures are necessary in order to ensure the defense of our country and the security of each and every citizen, because the alternative would be a civil war. 

we will have the full interview with mr. ortega after the news summary. at a news conference president-elect violeta chamorro joined ortega in calling for an end to hostilities. she said the causes that started the civil war have now disappeared and appealed to the contras to return home peacefully. a contra spokesman in honduras said his fighters are ready to discuss this with mrs. chamorro. the spokesman, alejandro elsavedo cautioned "without us here, there is no one to insist that ortega step down. but under the right conditions, we would demobilize sooner." there are believed to be 10,000 u.s.- backed rebels based in honduras. in washington, secretary of state baker said today that the united states agrees the contras should be disbanded. he made his comments before a senate committee. 

[picture but no audio initially] -- we think that with good will and the support of the international community, the u.n., the oas, and others that this issue can be resolved and we think it will be resolved. the war is over, mr. chairman, in nicaragua. 

pres. bush called soviet pres. gorbachev this morning to discuss the nicaragua situation and other matters. mr. bush said the conversation lasted about 40 minutes. he described to reporters aboard air force 1 on his way to a political appearance in new york. 

this morning i had a very good talk with pres. gorbachev. we touched on matters relating to nicaragua and central america, and also matters relating to the changes in europe. it was a very -- i'm not going to say any more of the details of the talk, but the, it was a very constructive conversation. 

why did you want to call -- 

discussing these two areas -- and i'm not going to go into the details of the talk, but i think it's important that there be some confidentiality if we're going to be able to speak as frankly as we did today. 

the president said he and gorbachev plan to continue such one on one consultations. jim. 

the u.s. supreme court today ruled on two right to search cases. the court approved the search of an armed robbery suspect's maryland home. they said no search warrant was needed because there was a reasonable belief a dangerous person was hiding inside. in the other case, federal agents, also without a warrant, searched a suspected mexican drug dealer's home in mexico. the justices again said none was needed because the u.s. constitution's ban against unreasonable searches does not apply to non-americans outside u.s. borders. also in washington today, d.c. mayor marion barry pleaded innocent to eight counts of cocaine possession and lying to a grand jury. a u.s. district court judge set a june 4th trial date. 

the northrop corporation has pleaded guilty to falsifying test data on two weapons systems sold to the u.s. military. the defense contractor admitted giving the government false information about defective parts for the cruise missile and harrier jet. northrop agreed to pay a $17 million fine. the company is also under investigation for fraud in its stealth bomber program. 

the space shuttle atlantis began a secret military mission today. it blasted off from cape canaveral, florida, just before 3 am eastern time. its flight path took it up the east coast. it was reportedly seen as far north as washington, d.c. five previous attempts to launch the shuttle were scrubbed due to poor weather, computer problems and mission commander john creyton's cold. the crew is expected to remain in space until sunday. the primary mission is believed to be the deployment of a spy satellite. 

the u.s. government today revised its latest figure on economic growth for the better. the commerce department said the gross national product for the last quarter of 1990 grew by .9 percent instead of the initial estimate of .5 percent. it's still the slowest growth rate in three years. it brings the gnp increase for all of 1990 to 3 percent compared to 4.4 percent the previous year. 

the soviet parliament today approved a new law allowing individuals to lease farm land. farmers will also be able to pass on the leases to their children. the law is part of pres. gorbachev's plan to restructure the nation's economy. it overturns the longstanding socialist policy against private land use. but the sale or outright ownership of land will still be barred under the new law. and that's it for the news summary tonight. now it's on to pres. daniel ortega of nicaragua, criminal charges against exxon, and a new medical malpractice report. news maker 

we begin tonight with a news maker interview with nicaragua's outgoing president daniel ortega. mr. ortega and the woman who defeated him on sunday violeta chamorro have began negotiations on a peaceful democratic change over of power which would be the first in nicaragua's history. a major stumbling block is the fate of the anti sandanista contras, the rebel group financed by the united states. earlier today correspondent kwame holman talked to president ortega in managua. the interpreter was alehandro bedania the secretary general of the nicaraguan foreign ministry. 

thank you for being here mr. president. were you surprised by the election results. did you know at any time before hand that the outcome would go against you? 

frankly it is in the nature of any election to consider the part of losing. but i thought that we could reach a majority. 

the uno had been depicted by many as disorganized unable to win. why do you think your party was rejected by the people? 

well the people had two options before them, at least perceived that. the perenta which was saying that everything was going to get better and the uno basically having the same message. and the people, of course, had been strongly pressured because of american policy particularly in their economic terms and social terms. so that many people that did give their vote to uno will have their heart with perenta. but what they said was that may be with uno the problems that perenta was not able to solve can be solved and that would explain why the vote went the way that it did. 

at the rally yesterday were those positions demands of the incoming government and which would you consider the most important? 

these are now the demands of the opposition of the sandinista front, of the biggest political party in nicaragua and these demands have to do with the basis of the revolutionary process. and i feel that there has to be a consensus that the fundamental basis of the revolution should not be altered because that would be altering democracy. democracy should be strengthened. 

and which are the primary or the most important aspects of that? 

the agrarian reform for example, having the bank and natural resources in state hands, to respect the professional character and the institutionality of the army and the ministry of interior. that state employees should not get fired on wholesale. these were indeed parts of their platform. 

indeed they were. is it reasonable for mrs. chamorro to call for the ouster of your brother as head of the army? 

well she has the right to speak out and to take a position but she must also take in to account he realities that have come about over the last few years and the changes that have taken place. indeed she should be thankful to the revolution for having been able to achieve the presidency. so she should take in to account those elements of the revolution which different sectors consider vital to felling secure. 

so in essence you would accept the ouster of top military and political people but not much further down in to the army in to the bureaucracy? 

these are points that are still being dealt with. the negotiations for the transition are taking place and this is some of the subject matters that have to be covered. 

president gorbachev and president bush have both accepted the results of the election. have you spoken to mr. gorbachev? 

no i haven't. 

do you feel that there was any role that mr. gorbachev and the soviet union could have played prior to the election that would have helped you in the election as the united states provided funds for the opposition party? 

well this was an election among nicaraguans but there is no denying of reality that the whole of nicaragua was under siege by u.s. pressures, u.s. sanctions, u.s. policy. so our elections did take place but in very special conditions. like people with a gun to the head of our people. it was a gun that took the form of economic embargo as a result of u.s. policy. elections that took place under u.s. threat and what the u.s. was virtually saying to the nicaraguan people is that if you don't vote for uno then the war and the economic sanctions are going to continue. and what the soviet union has done on the other hand to be respectful of the sovereign decision of the nicaraguan people. and they were respectful of our taking up the challenge of realizing undergoing elections under conditions that we extraordinary. so these we neither fair nor just conditions for the sandinista front. and then in that sense the people did not have much of a range in which to choose. 

yet you believe that the elections were free and fair and that the people expressed their true will? 

yes the people did have the right to put forth their choice but the fact is the context in which these elections took place was one of having a gun to the head of every nicaraguan. 

secretary baker said the contras should disband, mrs, chamorro said so, you said that should happen prior to april 25th. the contras have responded that they will not disband before the inauguration of the new government. what do you think of that position? 

that is extremely serious because that threatens all of the security of the entire country. and indeed it is contrary to the decision i have just taken to order a cease fire in order to facilitate the disbandment of this mobilization of the contras so that they can come home and that indeed we could have peace and tranquility by april 25th on which the transition date will take place. 

what great difference would it make if the contras disbanded now versus waiting until april 25th? 

first of all there is an agreement among the central american presidents that has been abided by nicaragua but that has not been respected by the contras. and then there is the security which we must insure of all those people who voted for us and that indeed amounts to over 40 percent of the electorate and they feel threatened by the contras especially now that the opposition has been victorious. so we have to insure the security for these people. 

that is a very important issue, i think that you say that it is the critical issue. can that be negotiated and if it is not negotiated to your satisfaction will you take the kinds of actions some describe such as strike making the country ungovernable? 

well as long as i am president i am going to take whatever measures are necessary to insure the defense of our country and the security of eachand every citizen because the alternative would be a civil war. and indeed it would be terrible when we have made so much progress that we should be confronted with that. so all nicaraguans have to join hands along with the united states in order to clear up this contra matter once and for all. 

you have asked for no further offenses against the contras. if the contras should be involved in some offensive of some kind are you saying that you would take action against them? 

this morning what we have done is ordered out troops to halt any offensive operations in order to allow the contras to demobilize people but if they chose not to demobilize then i will have to take other steps because my obligation is to insure the safety and security of every nicaraguan? 

can that issue of demobilization and when be negotiated successfully? 

well we feel that it has to take place before april 25th. 

if there is not war between armies, the contras and the government army, some fear war in the streets among party members from both sides that perhaps could escalate in to something more serious. do you fear that? 

here in lies the importance indeed of the talks that are going on between the respective transition teams. on our part general ortega and on the other part uno mr. antonio lacaia. so when there the items in relation to the future of the interior ministry and the army are being dealt with because this is something all nicaraguan have a stake in because these institutions are for the security of every one. 

when will the negotiations begin in earnest and are you happy so far with the talks? 

well the talks began yesterday and indeed we published a statement that they had began and the respective transition teams have been named and they are going to continue meeting regularly. they used to ask us to act with flexibility with realism and with maturity. now we are asking them to act with realism, flexibility and maturity. 

when you look at the events in eastern europe and the events here it has been said that there is an anti marxist tide in the world. your response. 

there is no anti marxist tide here. it is rather that you have enormous reaction here to the war to the crisis which has been posed by the united states on the nicaraguan people. because you have to take in to account that the sandinistas continue to be the strongest and largest single political party in nicaragua which is a far different situation which you have in eastern europe. 

does the election have significance will it effect things in mr. castro's cuba? 

we in our relations with cuba we have party to party relations as we do with a number of parties as we do have with members of the socialists international. i can't speak of the attitude that the cuban government is going to assume with respect to the new government. 

were you personally saddened by the results for your own relations with the voting public? 

yes it was a difficult situation but i had always been convinced that there was a real risk of losing the election. and what is really important here is not who won the sandinistas or uno. the important thing is that the elections did take place and that those elections should be free fair and clean and we sandinistas managed to accomplish that objective. 

what is the political future of daniel ortega? 

i continue to be with the people with the sandinista but i am now going to be working on a different basis and we are going to govern from the law sort of speak to defend what we have won the revolutionary conquests to demand that uno comply with all those programs that it said it was going to do in behalf of the people. we will support everything in the uno government that appears toward the national interest, toward the people's interest. 

you said we leave the scene victorious. what do you mean? 

because the sandinistas never sought out to create a one party state and there were elections here in 1984 but these in 1990 were even more important. if indeed we were put to the acid test our commitment to democracy and the best proof that we met this test was the election and the results. you see if we had won the elections there would have been those that would have called fraud, there had been intimidation, that it had not been fair but now as a result of these election results what you have indeed is the consolidation of democracy. 

thank you very much for joining us mr. president. 

still ahead on the newshour indicting exxon and medical malpractice. focus - exxon - facing charges 

now the criminal case against the exxon corporation. it was brought yesterday in anchorage, alaska, in a five count indictment growing out of last year's alaska oil spill. it charges exxon wit willfully and knowingly allowing unlicensed employees and others known to be physically or mentally incapable to operate the tanker exxon valdez. the company said yesterday it will fight the charges in court. if convicted, it could be fined more than $1 billion. exxon also faces more than 100 civil suits. neither exxon nor the justice department accepted our invitation to debate the case today. in their stead are two lawyers who disagree about the wisdom of filing criminal cases in such matters. robert adler is a senior attorney with the national resources defense council. the nrdc filed court papers to oppose any plea bargain for exxon. richard samp is chief counsel for the washington legal foundation. mr. adler, does exxon deserve to be treated as a criminal in this matter. 

absolutely. our congress has seen fit to provide in our laws that corporations can be held criminally accountable for environmental pollution. this was one of the major, most damaging pollution incidents in u.s. history and they ought to be held accountable. 

normally, a criminal case is based on malicious intent or whatever. do you believe that that is the case in the exxon case? 

well, i don't think that exxon deliberately intended to spill 11 million gallons of oil into alaskan waters, but it was clearly a highly negligent operation that allowed this to happen and that allowed it to be cleaned up almost not at all. if you drive a car negligently and kill someone in the process, you are held accountable, and the corporation should be held as accountable as you or i. 

mr. samp, is exxon a criminal? 

they certainly are not. we would certainly with mr. adler that it's important that exxon be held accountable if, in fact, it's been negligent in this case. but the proper way to hold them accountable is to bring civil actions against them where in the context normally used in matters of negligence, their conduct can be judge. criminal liability is wholly inappropriate in cases where simply negligence is charged. 

why is that? 

well, first of all, because we have an understanding in our society that when someone is branded a criminal that they are being branded as somebody who has done something extremely wrong that they need to be marked as someone who's highly culpable, and i don't think that's true in this particular case. secondly, the implications to any corporation or any corporate official who is convicted of a criminal charge are very huge in terms of the ability of a corporation to survive after that point, and we think that the punishment doesn't fit the crime. 

mr. adler, what about this criminal intent business? nobody when somebody is accused of murder or burglary, it is usually on the grounds that they intended to commit the murder and they intended to burglarize. and even you concede in this case that exxon did not intend to spill the oil. what's the difference here? 

well, there are many analogies in criminal law where we punish people under criminal statutes for conduct which is not malicious and not deliberate. if you negligently run a red light and you kill a pedestrian in the process, then you can be prosecuted for involuntary manslaughter under the criminal law. 

even if there is no intent obviously to run over the person at the red light. 

that's right. and the point is that we are punishing irresponsible conduct and we are deterring that person and anyone else in society from engaging in such conduct. now exxon was recklessly operating a tanker holding 50 million gallons of oil in dangerous waters. they should be held accountable just as you or i would for such conduct driving an automobile. 

mr. samp, is that not a good analogy between careless and reckless driving of a car versus careless and reckless driving of a tanker? 

i don't think so at all because first of all, we're talking about criminal charges against a corporation and in the case of a corporation, you're not going to send the corporation to charge. it's just a matter of how heavily you're going to be fining them, and in this particular case, exxon is certainly going to be deterred from any negligent conduct in the future. they've already spent more than $2 billion in the cleanup effort. they have paid compensation of close to $200 million to residents of alaska, including the fishermen there. they are the subject of hundreds of civil suits that have been filed against them, so i think it's a little bit naive to suggest that there is no deterrence in this case. 

are there precedents for this kind of action, mr. adler, an environmental disruption of this kind that resulted in criminal charges, where there was not the criminal intent to begin with? 

certainly there are. when the ashland oil company spilled oil into the ohio river two years ago, the federal government brought criminal charges and successfully settled that case. let's talk about the notion of bringing criminal charges against a corporation. corporations in this country argue all the time that they should have the same rights as individuals, property rights, due process of law. if they have the same rights, they have the same responsibilities as well and they cannot be held above the law any more than an individual. 

and yet in this case no individuals, no individual executives or employees of exxon were indicted, just the corporation, so there is a difference. 

up until now, no individuals have been indicted. we think as a matter of fact that the investigation ought to proceed and if any individual corporate executives are found to be individually responsible, then indictments ought to be brought against them as well. 

how do you feel about that, mr. samp? 

well, obviously, the corporation can only act through individuals, so for the government to prove its case, it's going to have to prove that certain individuals at exxon were negligent and criminally so, so that obviously the government by bringing an indictment against exxon believes that there are people who are criminally negligent out there. i think that if the government realizes that it would be bad public relations to indict the lower echelon employees who would be probably the ones who would have known something about the exxon valdez, and since this case is probably all a political show to begin with, they realize that it was better just to leave it at the corporation. 

a political show to begin with, what do you mean? 

well, it seems to me that this administration has made it clear that it wants to be tough and perceived to be tough on environmental polluters and they have been pressured by environmental groups to bring criminal -- 

like mr. adler's? 

exactly -- to bring criminal charges in this particular case and they realize that if they failed to do so, they would be charged with coddling environmental polluters. 

do you agree with that version of motivations here? 

we did not bring any direct pressure on the justice department to convene a grand jury. what you should remember is that it was a grand jury of citizens like you and me who decided that it was appropriate to bring exxon to justice. it was not due to pressure from environmental groups. 

let's talk about the message that this indictment - - it will all come out in the wash in the courtroom as to whether or not exxon is finally found guilty, but just the indictment, itself, what message does that send to american business and industry, mr. adler? 

the message, and an appropriate message at that, is that we will not tolerate conduct that causes severe damage to our natural resources. 

is that a new message? 

that is a new message in the magnitude. again, there have been other criminal indictments. we would encourage the justice department to pursue this indictment aggressively, to send that message very forcefully. 

what's your view of the message here? 

i would agree that that's the message and i think it's an unfortunate one. it seems to me that all of a sudden in this country it's become fashionable to see environmental preservation as the sole goal of issues that affect the environment. i think that that's an admirable goal. i think that preserving jobs is also an admirable goal. if we continue to penalize american business the way that this administration appears to be starting to do, we are simply not going to continue to be competitive in the world market, and it seems to me that the inevitable result is we're going to be losing jobs in this country. 

mr. adler. 

well, let's be realistic here. exxon corporation posted major profits last quarter despite the accident, despite the amount of money it spent on the cleanup. we're not going to put exxon out of business, we're not going to put a single person out of a job, but we will send a message to the corporation and its shareholders that if it wants to make a profit, it has to do so by abiding the law. 

do you agree, mr. samp, do you agree with mr. adler that while this is huge and its magnitude is still not precedent shattering, that there have been similar cases brought, similar criminal cases brought in environmental matters? 

there have been similar cases, most of them have been in recent years, and that's what very much worries me. i certainly agree with mr. adler that exxon is not going to be put out of business by this particular case, but some of the companies who are being charged criminally in recent years are being driven out of business. there is a client of our organization whose crime was removing rubbish from a dump, replacing the holes with clean fill dirt, and he's now facing a three year jail sentence for hits and his auto repair business is being closed down. and those are the kind of cases that particularly worry me. 

do those kinds of cases worry you, mr. adler, that this thing could get out of hand? 

what worries me is that despite many years of civil enforcement of environmental laws we still have widespread non- compliance. let me give you an example. according to the general accounting office, a recent study, four out of every ten industries who discharge toxic waste into the nation's sewer systems are violating their discharge permits despite civil compliance. obviously, we don't have enough deterrence, and without this sort of action corporate america is not getting the message that it has to comply with environmental laws. 

do you think this sends the new message though on those kinds of cases as well? 

i think it does to all corporations who are responsible for complying with pollution laws if pursued aggressively. 

your concern, mr. samp, is that it sends a double message, it may send a message to the bad guys, but it also sends the wrong message to the good guys as well? 

exactly, and it seems to me that, as i stated before, that this is not a reasonable environment in order to allow business to thrive in this country, that i would certainly agree that there are appropriate circumstances under which criminal law should be enforced. for example, it seems to me that any company that goes out in the middle night and takes drums full of toxic waste and dumps them in a park and does so knowingly and intentionally, that sort of corporation ought to be indicted. but we're not talking about that kind of case here. we're talking about a corporation which had no intention of spilling any oil, did so, perhaps through its own negligence, and now they're finding themselves in a criminal court. 

all right. mr. samp, mr. adler, thank you both for being with us. 

thank you. 

thank you. focus - negligent treatment 

next tonight new facts and the new debate about medical malpractice. a major study released today found that thousands of hospital deaths and tens of thousands of injuries each year are the result of negligence but that relatively few victims ever file malpractice claims in courts. the study conducted by harvard researchers examined one state, new york, that drew conclusions with implications for a malpractice insurance system nationally. the study was based on new york hospital patients in 1984. it found more than 27,000 patients were treated negligently in hospital, 6,630 deaths were due in part to negligence, but only one in eight of the patients injured by negligence actually sought compensation and filed malpractice claims. these figures fuel an already heated debate over what can be done to cut malpractice insurance costs and improve medical care. pres. bush spoke last week to doctors at johns hopkins university about the impact of malpractice lawsuits on medical care. 

[february 22] and i ask you today to avoid the understandable urge to practice defensive medicine, where doctors fearing litigation too often dictate treatment that is unnecessary, where the threat of lawsuits threatens the very research that is so desperately needed to save lives, and in return, we've got to restore common sense and fairness to america's medical malpractice system. 

restoring common sense to the system is the subject of a proposal in this week's new england journal of medicine. the article calls for implementing a no fault malpractice insurance system. the no fault system would take cases out of courtrooms and set up expert panels to compensate victims. we turn now to reaction to today's study and a debate over the no fault solution proposal. dr. david axelrod is the new york state commissioner of health. he commissioned the harvard report today and is one of the leading proponents of the no fault insurance solution. harvey wachsman is a physician and practicing lawyer. he is president of the american board of professional liability attorneys. he's on the faculty of brooklyn law school and the university of south florida college of medicine. dr. axelrod, what is the surprising finding in your study, the large amount of negligence, or the small amount of claims? 

i think it was rather the small amount of claims. a previous study done at stanford approximately 10 years ago identified roughly the same percentage of adverse events, that is injuries to patients that occurred that would lead us to have believed at least that the number would be approximately the same. there is a concern i have with the data that are being presented and that is that this is an extrapolation from the review of some 30,000 charts to over 2.7 million discharges in 1984. so to say that numbers of thousands of individuals who are identified as having died represents an extrapolation from 1,100 cases in which injury was identified in the harvard study. 

i see. it's like a poll. in other words, you've taken a sample and you're saying that represents that reality? 

that is correct. 

right, like a blood sample. 

yes. 

okay. why do you believe there are so few malpractice claims arising out of so many cases of negligence? 

i think in many instances, the patient is not aware of the fact that any negligence has been committed. i think there are difficulties in accessing what is otherwise identified as an officious system with respect to the individual person. i don't think that the average person thinks that there is much chance of success. an individual who comes from a lower socii-economic background may not feel that he has the wherewithal or she has the wherewithal to purse a malpractice suit. there is no clear indication that our system is geared to one of social responsibility with respect to payment for medical injury and it leads more to an event that looks like entering a lottery with respect to a return with a medical malpractice suit. 

do you share pres. bush's belief that fear of malpractice claims, that doctors hold of malpractice claims, is distorting the medical delivery system? 

yes, i believe that there is a distortion which is occurring. i think it's occurring in a number of different areas. the most important of them may, in fact, be the unwillingness of physicians to participate in peer review of their own colleagues. that fear i think has removed an important element of maintaining the quality of healthcare within our institutions. without full participation of physicians, it is not going to be possible to have a full review of what happens and the manifestation of quality that we would like to have. i do believe there is a cost impact associated with the practice of defensive medicine. i don't know what it is. it's been estimated to be 5 percent or 10 percent or 15 percent in various studies. 

how does that come about? 

doctors because of their concern for their ultimate testimony in the event that they should be faced with a malpractice suit attempt to go to the nth degree with respect to the ruling out of diseases. there is an error of commission in many instances with respect to reaching the 99.9 percentile in terms of likelihood of a given disease by some very expensive tests. we have a broad armamentarium of diagnostic tests, valuative procedures that are available to the valuative procedures that are available to the medical profession, and the physician may choose to utilize one or many of them or all of them in an effort to assure himself that he is not going to be subject to litigation by virtue of his failure to have done a single test. 

okay. we'll come back in a moment. dr. wachsman, do you dispute the findings of the survey? 

i think the survey's findings of enormous of amount of malpractice in this country is true. i think that there are numbers of physicians who are alcoholics, drug addicts, psychiatrically impaired. according to the ama 7 to 9 percent, or thirty to forty thousand physicians in this country are impaired. obviously, that would cause an enormous amount of malpractice which does cut across this country, and you extrapolate those numbers, that comes out to about 100,000 people a year die because of malpractice in hospitals alone. this was a study of hospitals, not even doctors' offices, and hundreds of thousands of people are injured. the reason for the great disparity between the numbers of lawsuits and the numbers of malpractice is clear. it's due to deception and fraud practiced by physicians and hospitals in this country, misleading patients, so that they do not know, and they are misrepresented to in a wholesale manner by physicians so that they cannot find out what exactly occurred. there's also changing of records, forgery that goes on on a national level, that's as significant as well. 

but for those patients who do find out and do know or suspect there's been malpractice, dr. axelrod said they don't claim because they think they're throwing themselves into a lottery. 

it's not so. first of all, those people who are significantly injured or, in fact, were injured, they win the cases because they're meritorious. in our office, we just heard before from dr. axelrod, there's very few wins by patients, not so. in our office, more than 90 percent of the patients who come to us, who we actually bring a lawsuit for, we win, and although we only take about 3 percent of those patients who actually call or contact our office in order to bring a suit. 

do you agree with dr. axelrod and the president that doctors fearing malpractice are practicing defensive medicine and that that is raising the cost of healthcare? 

that's absolutely untrue. that's something that has been propagated by medicine and also obviously misled the president into thinking that there is so much defensive medicine going on. there is none essentially, because no test that does not help a patient or at least find the diagnosis or help elucidate the diagnosis for that patient in no way assists the physician in defending himself. and the truth of the matter is, that most malpractice is not due to the 99 percentile test but is due to three things, one, the physician not showing up, two, i'm talking about seeing the patient and evaluating him rather than over the phone or showing up some other time, two, is not taking a proper history, which takes time to evaluate a patient and 80 percent of diagnosis is made on history, and three, is not doing a proper, a physical examination. 70 percent of all malpractice cases across this country are due to a physician not showing up, not taking a proper history, examining, and if you look at that, i think any patient is entitled to those things and not due to some test that somehow he didn't do. those cases we have wide experience, we've written three volumes in the area, it's not so. 

you say it's not so, but you wouldn't agree with the cartoon, with the sort of folk wisdom that's in the cartoon in the new yorker recently where a doctor is saying to a patient, well, i think it's just a common cold, but let's run a full battery of tests just to be sure? 

no, because that's just not true. again that's misrepresentation. there have been a lot of things in history, as you're aware of, that have occurred and knowledge that's pushed around and stated when, in fact, it's not true. the truth is that there is no great defensive medicine. the only defensive medicine that does exist, which i do agree with, is when a physician spends more time with his patient, talks him and examines him over a longer period of time, and, therefore, can see less patients per hour and therefore, there's a cost to that physician because he can't make as much money. but it's certainly not due to tests. 

two quite different points of view on this. now, you are in favor of replacing the present system with a no fault system. can you explain briefly how that would work and why it would improve things, in your view? 

i think the first difficulty is that you've been talking about the harvard study dealing with medical malpractice. the harvard study did not deal with medical malpractice. the harvard study dealt with medical injury and the nature of that injury and the extent to which negligence was responsible for that injury. only 1 percent of the cases that were reviewed by the harvard study demonstrated negligence, so that what we have tried to do is to define our terms a little bit better. we are concerned with a social system which provides justice to those who are injured by virtue of their contact with the healthcare system. our concern is that the medical care system is a hazardous one in terms of your entry into that system because of the nature of the interventions, and that there is a distinct possibility for injury. the no fault system which we are proposing would have a mechanism by which individuals would be paid on the basis of the nature of that injury if there was causality established, rather than fault assigned to a given physician. it would not be necessary for an individual to become a plaintiff within an adversarial system in order to be compensated for the injury which occurred. 

well, who would decide whether they were at fault, the office or hospital -- 

it would presumably be a panel of individuals who would be expert with respect to the nature of those injuries, it would work similar to worker's compensation where those who make decisions with respect to occupational health would make a judgment. 

why would that be an improvement over the system now? 

because as it currently stands, the harvard study demonstrates that only 1 in 10, approximately 1 in 10 individuals, who have been injured as a result of negligence ever receive any kind of compensation. there is nothing to suggest that there is any equity, that it's an effective system with respect to compensation for medical injury. i think what we have to do is to separate what it is we're trying to do. are we simply trying to provide a small number of individuals that has no relationship to the nature of the injury? 

in other words, big awards, millions of dollars? 

big awards as opposed to providing everyone who suffers an injury that is significant with a level of compensation that is relevant to the nature of that injury. 

why wouldn't that be an improvement on this system? 

i think first of all, all it does is grant immunity and that's what they're really interested in. the whole purpose of the study was not to see to it how they can compensate people better but to gain immunity. i can point to virginia and new zealand which has no fault. in new zealand, since january 1, 1988, they have a brain damaged baby circumstance -- 

no fault -- 

-- no fault system, and they're going to compensate all these children, the total number of children in two years and two months that have been compensated is zero. in new zealand, there's no fault system where a patient has to prove their case to an official of the government. that just doesn't occur, because they can't do it. one little comment that dr. axelrod mentioned in passing was the word "causation". the word "causation" means proximate cause under the law. that is the most difficult thing for a malpractice lawyer who's capable to prove in any case. no patient will ever be able to prove it by themselves. 

in other words, this is just giving the doctors immunity because you'll never pay anybody because the doctors will never admit if they review themselves or a committee reviews them, they'll never admit that there was malpractice. 

but we've confused two very different things. we've confused physician discipline and deterrence with an equitable system for compensation for medical injury. both dr. wachsman and i would agree that there needs to be a better disciplinary system. i do not believe that there is any data that would suggest that the existing malpractice system represents an effective deterrent. that was one of the elements of the harvard study and i think that there is, if any presence of deterrence, it's very limited. 

but his point is that the system you're proposing would represent no deterrence at all. 

oh, no, oh, no, hardly. 

i mean, he instances no compensation for birth damaged babies under the virginia's no fault system and the inability of patients in new zealand under their system to gain any admission of malpractice. 

well, there's, i don't want to get into other systems, because i think that there are complexities about the new zealand system which has been in place for 15 years that, in fact, has not had an effective deterrent system. the virginia system has been in place for one year in which there has been any experience, and i don't know that that is an appropriate time frame in which to judge the effectiveness of the program. what i think you have to do is identify the fact that we have not been as good as we think we have been with respect to oversight of physicians. i think that there needs to be a whole new arena in which we evaluate the effectiveness of the oversight of government, the failures of the existing physician peer review process, the failures of the hospital review process, but i think that the most important thing of all that will challenge the effectiveness of any malpractice system, any no fault system even, will be the new information that is emerging. one of the major revolutions that has occurred is the availability of information with respect to outcome, with respect to procedures within institutions, procedures done by physicians. i am firmly convinced that it is the public, it is the advocacy of the public, it is the public requesting information that is going to change the medical practice in the most imaginative way possible. 

i'm sorry, gentlemen, but that is the end of our time. thank you both for joining us. recap 

again, the major stories of this wednesday, nicaragua's sandinista government declared a unilateral cease-fire in the war against the contras. on the newshour, pres. ortega said if the contras refuse to disband, he will do what is needed to defend his nation. and after five previous attempts, nasa successfully launched the space shuttle atlantis. good night, robin. 

good night, jim. that's the newshour tonight and we will be back tomorrow night. i'm robert macneil. good night.
