

good evening. and happy new year! i'm jim lehrer. on the newshour tonight two ways to remember 1996, as a banner year for gene research and how it looked to some editorial cartoonists, plus a richard rodriguez essay about somebody named madonna. it all follows our summary of the news this holiday. news summary 

there was violence in the west bank town of hebron today. an off-duty israeli soldier fired into a crowd of palestinian civilians. at least five arabs were wounded by the attacker who lives in a jewish settlement elsewhere on the west bank. the shooting occurred as negotiators were trying to conclude an agreement on the withdrawal of israeli troops from hebron. we have a report from robert moore of independent television news.

within seconds of the shooting israeli soldiers pounced on a jewish settler, forcing him to the ground after he had fired his assault rifle directly into hebron's crowded marketplace. the settler, who is also a serving soldier and was in uniform, was raced from the scene for his own protection. there were fears that palestinians would seek immediate revenge for this attack. it is the latest bloodshed in a city that is on the verge of a transfer of power. as the wounded were taken away, the attacker admitted he had wanted to sabotage the hebron peace agreement. sporadic violence broke out across the city this afternoon. palestinians, who under the imminent hebron deal are poised to gain self rule, say there can never be peace while the jewish settlers live in their midst. 

israeli security forces identified the gunman as 22 year old noam friedman, who was drafted five months ago. friedman was wearing a military uniform at the time of the shooting but had not been assigned to duty in hebron. israeli prime minister netanyahu immediately phone palestinian leader arafat to condemn the shooting. president clinton also called arafat to offer his condolences. israeli and palestinian negotiators went ahead with today's talks on palestinian control of hebron. on the peruvian hostage story seven more captives were released from the japanese ambassador's residence in lima today, including four japanese citizens and three peruvians of japanese descent. a roman catholic bishop, who has been a frequent visitor to the hostages, announced the men would be freed. they left the residence on a bus for a police medical center. the terrorists holding the remaining 74 hostages have demanded the release of 300 of their comrades from peruvian jails. in this country today there was more bad weather in the northwest. heavy rains hit northern california. the national weather service predicted disastrous flood levels for the russian and napa rivers north of san francisco. temperatures rose to a record 54 degrees in seattle, melting snow and causing mud slides. washington governor mike lowry declared a state of emergency in 19 counties. at least 11 deaths have been blamed on the weather. property damage in washington, oregon, and california is estimated at up to $250 million. the weather did not affect the 108th tournament of roses parade in southern california. an estimated 1 million people were there in pasadena to watch the parade that had the theme "life's shining moments." the event began with a b-2 fly-over, followed by the traditional procession of flower-laden floats. among them was a float celebrating the kingdom of thailand which won an award for outstanding showmanship. and that's it for the news summary this new year's day. now it's on to gene research, a cartoonist's view of 96, and a richard rodriguez essay. focus - genetic advances 

we begin tonight with a look at what has been a banner year for gene research and on tape we go to our business correspondent paul solman of wgbh-boston. he prepared this assessment last week. 

what makes us tick and what makes us sick? gene research is literally about the stuff of life, and this year saw major new advances on the scientific and commercial front. we begin with this background from fred de sam lazaro of kceta-st. paul- minneapolis. 

seven years ago cystic fibrosis, a degenerative lung disease of children, was traced to its genetic foundation. scientists were able to identify a gene that, when defective, causes cystic fibrosis. the discovery by a team of scientists led by dr. francis collins was widely acclaimed. isolating a single gene from the 80,000 or so found in every human cell was the equivalent of locating a house somewhere between california and new york, with no clue as to the street address or even the city. 

cloning the cystic fibrosis gene was really a great leap forward and in cloning technology, and it was a huge and laudable effort. and a lot of those techniques are still certainly, you know, applicable to today. 

university of minnesota geneticist dr. scott mcivor says since the cystic fibrosis breakthrough shortcuts have been honed and developed to sift through the complex maze of dna. individual genes, the basic building blocks that determine every aspect of life, are not only numerous, each consists of tens of thousands of precisely sequenced bits of protein called bases or nucleotides. 

the dna samples are loaded here where you see these teeth sticking in. 

today, new techniques have allowed scientists like dr. alexander kamb to screen dna samples in search of genes. 

there's a laser here which excites the fluorescent dyes, and that's internalized in the computer, displayed here as an image in color, and so you can see now the result of that, all these little ladders here, little bands corresponding to different bases in the nucleotide sequence. and if a person has, for example, a mutation at a particular position and a particular gene, this kind of analysis will tell you that. 

meanwhile, under the auspices of the federal government's human genome project now headed by dr. francis collins, the entire genome is being mapped. scientists across the world add to this database when they locate a gene. those who want to study the genetic basis of the disease now have access in journals or on the internet to a growing road map that can lead them to candidate genes, providing either a general location, like which of the 23 chromosomes the gene is on, or a more precise address. 

the analogy in this case would be that the chromosomal assignment would tell you which state it's in, and the much more fine structure map that's provided by the human genome project, and eventually the sequence would give you an actual street map, or an even house-to-house map. 

pursuing that analogy further, once mcivor has located a house, he can then start to look for burned out light bulbs, defects or mutations in genes, like missing or wrongly sequenced bases, the kind of things that lead to disease. 

doh is working with a retro viral vector that she's been engineering for treatment of a disease called hurler syndrome and the idea is to use this retro viral vector to introduce a functional gene and hopefully, if we can use this retro virus to introduce a functional iduronadase gene, then we may be able to correct the disease conditions in hurler syndrome. 

a little transplant that's happening. 

right. a gene transplant. 

mcivor's is one of several labs that have taken the next step to gene therapy, trying to find a way to re- introduce functioning genes to take the place of faulty ones. 

we don't really have the capability yet to go back and turn on specific light bulbs again, but we may be able to plug in an extra light bulb somewhere else that would illuminate the area that needs to be illuminated. 

and restore function essentially. 

right. 

although gene therapy has shown promise in limited trials, most scientists agree it's in early infancy, years away from clinical application. for now, the big news has been in the discovery of genes. so far nearly 1/4 of the genome, 20,000 genes, have been located, most of them just identified, others linked to traits or conditions ranging from obesity to anxiety. more importantly, mapping has been used to locate 78 crucial proteins that are directly linked to diseases. in 1996 alone, 21 such disease genes were identified responsible for certain forms of alzheimer's, diabetes, and skin cancer, among others. last month scientists located markers, the approximate location of a gene linked to parkinson's disease, and in another significant find one responsible for certain forms of prostate cancer, one of the most common causes of death in american men. 

she had breast cancer first at 29 and then again at 39. 

also in 1996 building on the discovery earlier of genes linked to some breast cancers tests became commercially available to screen women for the genes and, therefore, their predisposition to these breast cancers. 

now to our discussion. dr. francis collins, as we've just seen, directs the human genome project, officially known as the national center for human genome research. mary jo ellis kahn is a patient advocate with the national breast cancer coalition. steven holtzman is chief business officer of millennium pharmaceuticals, a biotech firm in boston, and patricia king is a professor on law and medical ethics at georgetown university law school here in washington. and, welcome to you all. dr. collins, let's start with you. how significant a year was it in terms of genetics and why? 

i think it's been a remarkable year. at the basic science level, the human genome project which started in 1990, past its sixth birthday, able to claim victory with the genetic maps that were the first milestone for the project well ahead of schedule. the physical maps that we needed are also probably about 96 percent done. we finished-- 

physical maps means the city level, the state level. 

the physical maps you can think of as sort of chunks of dna, the road maps of the cities and counties that you need to achieve that house-to-house search that you eventually need to get to if you're going to have all the games in front of you. the sequence, i.e, the series of the letters, the a, c, g, and t, i.e., that four-letter alphabet of dna, of all of the human dna is now the part that we are rolling up our sleeves and wading into. and there are 3 billion letters in that particular instruction book. 

that's what fred was looking at with the guy in the computer, looking at-- 

right. coming out of that colored ladder on the screen. if you printed out the entire human instruction book in books with average font size and page size and piled them one on top of the other, it would be about the height of the washington monument. and so far we've only done about 1 percent of that. but seven or eight years from now we'll have done it all. 

mr. holtzman, in terms of what we've done in terms of commercial breakthroughs, we've seen genes for i think there's novelty-seeking even, somebody said, anxiety, things like that. how big a breakthrough in a commercial sense has this year been? 

[boston] well, as little as two to three years ago, there was a common belief that genetics would be important only for relatively rare disorders which are called single gene disorders, such as cystic fibrosis. what's happened in the last year to year and a half is a recognition that genetics is essentially a tool, genetics and genomics, as it's called, for elucidating the underlying biological causes of disease, including the most major forms of common diseases, our susceptibility to them, and elucidating the causes of the progression and initiation of those diseases. that kind of understanding provides the basis for starting to develop drugs which can address those diseases at their underlying cause, and not just gene therapies but early available drugs of the type that major pharmaceutical companies are interested in. 

are we close to getting those kinds of drugs? have we begun to get them? 

no, we haven't even begun to get them. what we've begun to get is the kind of understanding that allows us to begin to think about developing medicines which can actually prevent and cure disease for the first time, as opposed to only palliating symptoms. and as a result, the pharmaceutical companies have made significant investments in young biotechnology companies, such as millennium, who've made early investments in this technology. 

okay. ms. kahn, how big a year from the consumer or patient point of view? 

well, it's been a wonderful year for great potential. there's a potential that we will find out the secrets of breast cancer enough that we can prevent or cure it, but we're not there yet. and from the viewpoint that we are in- -breast cancer patients are in grave danger at the moment because we have not put in place the policies that we need to protect us from discrimination. 

"we," so you mean you are a breast cancer patient? 

i am a breast cancer patient with a family history, and i have two young daughters, and although finding out our genetic status may be very useful to the family to learn who needs to be followed more carefully and what medical care we should receive, it's too dangerous at this point because my daughters could lose their health insurance based on just testing. 

and that's the kind of issue that these breakthroughs raise, right, professor king? 

that's correct. this has been a banner year but it's not unusual at all. the resolution of some of the legal and ethical problems really lag far behind the scientific breakthroughs. so we're still trying to work out the policies not only for clinical screening but for an introduction of new tests for general use. but we have bigger problems like health insurance, keeping information private and confidential. we have problems with discrimination. we have potential problems with discrimination in the work place based on one's genetic traits. so we have a lot to do, i think, but i'm hopeful because major breakthroughs have a way of crystallizing the public mind to tackle these kinds of issues, and that may be what we needed. 

let's go back to the issues in a minute, if we could. there are a couple of questions i just have personally. for example,dr. collins, how close are we, do you suppose, in years to a major breakthrough on the aging process? i say this out of some personal concern here. i mean, are we at the point where we could begin to think about reversing or making headway on the aging process? 

it's always hard to answer these questions about how far are we away. we have certainly made strives in understanding aging, actually from a genetic point of view. a relatively rare condition called werner's syndrome, which is one of these premature aging disorders, had its gene found this year. and that is probably a window into a process that's been pretty obscure until now. certainly when it comes to some of the diseases of aging, such as alzheimer's and prostate cancer, there have been breakthroughs this year. but in terms of understanding the process by which everything sort of wears out and runs down, that is going to be a very difficult process. and i don't think we're anywhere near to that fountain of youth model that some people hope for. 

yeah. that's what i was hoping for. 

i'm sorry. 

mr. holtzman, average longevity for a kid born in the year 2000, for example. i mean, i don't--we'll never get back to you on this, but do you think we're going to have substantially increased longevity say for kids being born in the next few years? 

not in the next few years. i think, as dr. collins indicated, if we look at what gets in the way of longevity, namely certain diseases of aging, we will have insight into those and better drugs for treating those. 

what about cancer? we're talking here about breast cancer specifically. i think the cancer rate has for the first year gone down in terms of survival. that's a five-year survival rate still, or no? 

no. that's mortality statistics across the population for a number of cancers for the first time this century have begun to decline, not entirely clear all the reasons for that, but obviously not declining nearly fast enough to suit most of us. cancer is an area where i think the potential for advances in the next ten to fifteen years are really quite substantial because cancer comes about because of mutations in dna. we are learning a lot about mutations in dna, and we should be able to harness that into the development of more effective therapy in the not-too- distant future, but we're not quite there yet for most of the common cancers. 

so that's why you're happy. what exactly are you worried about? i mean, explain to us what you mean when you're worried about knowing things for you and for your children. 

well, until we have in place a treatment that goes with genetic testing where we can say that there is obvious benefit, and everyone agree you should be tested, you should get this treatment, then what we're left with is a lot of information, powerful information, that may or may not improve our quality of life. 

currently there is a cancer, a breast cancer test available of some sort? 

well, there are two genes that are--if you have a mutation in them--are associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. but it's not clear in everyone who carries a mutation what your risk is. it's not clear at what year you'll get breast cancer if you do get it. there's a lot of things unknown still, but there is a test, and in some high risk families where there are lots of members affected by breast and ovarian cancer it might be useful to know if you carry one of these mutations. but since you can't prevent it, and you can't cure breast cancer in every incidence, then what you really need to do is provide a way to do the research. and if we have discrimination as a major risk, one will not be able to participate in these studies. we can't get to a decreased mortality. 

what do you mean by discrimination? i'm not following? 

well, our biggest risk right now is health insurance discrimination. and if the health insurance industry were able to say for those people who can be tested for breast cancer, colon cancer, alzheimer's, any number of diseases that we'll soon have tests for, that from birth you are no longer eligible to buy insurance, then you will have a genetically-disadvantaged population who eventually could die of these diseases simply because they can't get care. 

so you wouldn't take the test, you haven't had your kids take the test? 

my family's decided that it's not in our best interest because my daughters and my niece, the next generation, need their health insurance more than they need this information. 

so it's not out of fear of finding out the results; it's out of the health insurance, the worry about health insurance? 

yes, absolutely. 

and patricia king, how do we deal with that? i mean, is that the major issue that's raised by genetic testing or screening? 

well, it's one of the major issues. it's not the only one. but not only does it present problems for individuals because the information is powerful, not only do you have a problem in getting health insurance, you may have a problem getting employment because remember, most health insurance in this country is provided for by employers. health insurance is expensive. so you not only have to worry about your coverage; you have to worry about your employment; and you have to worry about what to tell your children or, indeed, whether to have children. so the information is quite powerful. and this information feeds on existing inequities in our system. we can't currently protect persons who know they are at risk for certain diseases or, in fact, have certain diseases with respect to health insurance or even employment. we're just beginning to come to grips with this problem. we can't yet assure you that the information, should we get it, would be protected and kept confidential. so it's not only an individual problem; it's a huge social problem that feeds into a system that already has problems, not to mention that if we actually can do something for people who are screened one day for breast cancer, we can't assure some people that they will have access to the health care system at all, not with just with respect to insurance, but because they may not be able to afford it. so this is the tip of the iceberg in terms of our social problems. 

dr. collins, how do researchers deal with these issues? 

i think many researchers are deeply concerned about this as well. i certainly am. i think it will be a terrible tragedy if this set of scientific advances with so much promise to benefit humankind gets, instead, converted into a new way to discriminate against people in an ever more powerful and unfair fashion, and the whole field ends up, therefore, stillborn as the advance in medicine that we would have wanted it to be, that would be the greatest tragedy. i think there is some movement, though, in addressing these issues. only a few months ago, the kassebaum-kennedy health insurance bill was passed and signed by the president. it does say that at least in some circumstances health insurance companies may not use genetic information to deny coverage. it has areas that it doesn't cover which seriously need to be addressed quickly, but in this past year, there were no less than a dozen bills in congress that dealt with genetic discrimination and privacy. and i suspect in the 105th congress there will be at least that much interest. but it's--the time is now. we have to wait this time for a crisis, for a catastrophe for everybody running around, wringing their hands, saying, how did we get to this point, that will be so unnecessary and so tragic. 

i want to ask mr. holtzman, how do you respond to this from a business point of view? for example, there's this breast cancer test that's being sold in utah. do you think that a company should be marketing a breast cancer test, given the little amount we know, and the potential for discrimination that currently exists until such legislation would come in? 

well, i think the first point to make is the industry has taken a stand completely consistent with the scientific community stand, as represented by dr. collins. the biotechnology industry organization was highly supportive of taking position papers in support of the kennedy-kassebaum legislation as an active bioethics committee supporting these sorts of anti- discriminatory--discriminatory and anti-privacy kinds of issues. 

but not everybody in the industry, for example, i assume. 

well, i think it's--the organization which represents the biotech industry. personally, i have the great fortune of serving on the national bioethics advisory commission, and this is a major issue on our plate, as well, and we are addressing. clearly, we have a stake as an industry and as people who have gotten into this industry because we believe in the power of the technology to ensure better technological sophistication is not dis-served by our social--lack of social maturity and the misuse of it. 

please. i wanted to ask one last question. i didn't mean to cut you off, but parental screening is an issue that i'd read about and heard about, the idea that you could prevent a kid who--as i say--who had some propensity to be, i don't know, anxious, too anxious, and you didn't want that kind of kid, or homosexual, or some of the things that we felt about with respect to possible involvement of genes. that's an issue we haven't talked about here. patricia king. 

well, first of all, let me say, we already have some capacity to screen fetuses prenatally for pretty severe diseases. 

down's syndrome. 

down's syndrome, sickle cell anemia, for example, so this won't be new; it will be magnified. and one of the-- 

magnified hugely, wouldn't it, if you could tell all kinds-- 

that's exactly right. you have a lot more screening tests for fetuses. you have magnified your issues, and you've magnified them in the following way. we think of down's syndrome as being a very serious disease, sickle cell as being serious. some of the characteristics that we could potentially screen for in the future some of us might not think of as being so serious that we should think about not having that fetus. so one of the things that i think about with respect to genetics is not will it--not only will it change our immediate lives in a way that we have to think about but it has the potential for changing where we see ourselves, our parent-child relationships, what we want from our children, what we tell our children. now, i agree with dr. collins. i don't think i should go around crying tears about what is to come. i think the real challenge is to try to figure out ways to take on effectively some of these issues, and i think that we have sort of laid a groundwork in the last six, seven years, but we really need to have more concentrated, i think, national attention to deal with some of the big social issues. we're dealing with in a piecemeal fashion--health care in the congress, states are passing their own laws to deal with discrimination. they are doing it piecemeal. we need a more concerted look at the immediate issues and how they affect individuals, but some of the broader social issues. in the past the president's commission on ethics in the early 80's did wonderful work with respect to big issues then and helping to educate the public and prepare us for the technology. we need something like that again. we need a broader group to take a look at some of these issues. 

and i take it--because you're nodding, ms. kahn-- that you fully agree with this? 

oh, absolutely. i think it's very hard for policy to keep up with the rapid pace of science. and we need a better method of doing that. but in part, it's educating the public about how to think about this, rather than thinking in terms of designer children and how you make a perfect child with genetics, you really need to be thinking--in my family it's not that the person's not valuable; it's that the disease is very bad. we need to treat the disease. and if we try to generalize too much--and i think that's where the discrimination comes from--that just because you have one mutation in all of these billions of genes that that does not change the person. and so we really need to keep focused on what kind of treatments we're looking for. 

and that's that genetic determinism that you're dead set against, isn't it, dr. collins? 

which i'm very concerned about. we hear about the gene for this and the gene for that. and if you're talking about something like anxiety or novelty seeking, good grief, this is ridiculous. those are personality characteristics which have genetic contributions that are enormously complex. no single gene would account for more than a tiny fraction of such characteristics, and much of that is learned behavior that comes about as we're growing up as kids and interacting with our environment. and i'm deeply concerned that in our enthusiasm--and i'm certainly enthusiastic--to promote what genetics can do for us in the medical sense that we are also geneticizing other aspects of human behavior to the point where people begin to conclude that every aspect of what they did today was controlled by these invisible marionette strings made of the double helical dna. that ain't so. we're not going to eliminate free will. we're not going to eliminate the environment, even when we understand the whole genome. 

excellent. well, then with free will i say it's the end of the discussion. thank you all very much. 

still to come on the newshour tonight cartoonists on 1996 and a richard rodriguez essay. focus - a year to remember - 1996 

now to a second and very different view of the year that just ended. it was recorded earlier by elizabeth farnsworth. 

we look back at 1996 through the eyes and drawings of four editorial cartoonists: michael ramirez, of the memphis commercial appeal and usa today; steve kelley of the san diego union tribune; doug marlette of newsday; and ann telnaes of the north american syndicate. thank you all for being with us. steve kelley, was this a good year for cartoonists? 

oh, by all means it was. we had a lot of unusual events that sort of percolated to the surface. plus, it was a--it was an election year. so election years are always like an all-you-can-eat buffet for a political cartoonist. so we had all of those issues and, in addition, a lot of sort of unusual one-day wonders i call them. 

like? 

well, for example, the kid reached over the wall in one of the playoff series and snatched the ball, and roberto alomar spit on an umpire, and jonathan prevett kissed a little girl on the cheek at school and was sued for sexual harassment. he was in the first grade. so those were all very ripe subjects for political cartoons. 

was it a good year for you, doug marlette? 

oh, yeah. an election year is always good, and, you know, actually most years are good. it feels like we're talking about a wine. you know, it was a vintage year for cartoons. 

and, of course, it was a good year for you. it probably wasn't a good year for everybody else. 

that's exactly right. that's one of the ironies of our business is in the chuckles racket as we call it, but you know, bad times for the republic are good times for cartoonists. so we are--we had a good year. the election made it especially easy. when i say easy, i mean that there are so many topics coming at you, you end up drawing those one-day wonders because it's such a relief not to be drawing on the candidates. that's one of the reasons. you're looking for something else. 

ann telnaes, how about for you? was it a rich year for you? 

oh, it was a great year for cartoonists. it was actually the first time i had followed an election in my cartoons from the primaries on. so i found it very interesting. i mean, i loved drawing bob dole. i just--i'm kind of very sad that he's gone now because he was just such a wonderful character, and that dole-speak was just priceless. it offered a lot for us to work with. 

michael ramirez, how would you rate it if you had to rate this year on a scale of one to ten? 

well, i think it was pretty much near the top. i think it's close to ten. election years always seem to be like christmas all year around. and when you have a multitude of candidates that garnered about as much enthusiasm as watching the rose bowl seven times in one day, or the rose bowl parade, that generates great editorial cartoons. and i think here we had a classic election where neither candidate really generated much enthusiasm and, therefore, they made great cartoon fodder. so i think it's been a terrific year. 

michael, let's look at one of your cartoons from the elections and talk about it for a minute. here we have a bridge. both ends of the bridge are falling apart. on one end it says "clinton bridge to the future," on the other end "dole bridge to the past." and "voters" in-between. looking back, is this how the elections still strike you? 

yeah. i think i pretty much characterized it literally how the voters felt about the candidates. it seemed that they were kind of stuck in this montage of the same old campaign rhetoric with two candidates that didn't really represent what they're saying. and, therefore, they didn't really have good choices. and i just took the two campaign statements that both bob dole and bill clinton use and just kind of fashioned it into the cartoon where the voters were just stuck with no real choice. 

ann telnaes, what's most memorable as you look back now on the elections? 

i think the importance of the moderate voter. i did a lot of cartoons regarding that. 

okay. let me interrupt one second. let's put one up. here you have sen. dole leaning towards i guess a moderate voter, saying, "i want you to know i'm very tolerant," but he's playing footsie with somebody to his right, a woman who's labeled "far right." 

yeah. that was at the point in the campaign where the dole team finally realized they were really behind in the polls with women voters, and, you know, they started trotting out a few moderate republican congresswomen to tell everyone how tolerant the party actually was. and, you know, if you followed anything from the primaries on with pat buchanan and bob doran, you had to kind of laugh at that. i found it very amusing, so that was the reason i did that cartoon. 

doug marlette, how about you? the first lady and mrs. dole, who wanted to be first lady, gave you some laughs, didn't they? 

oh, yeah. both first ladies were terrific for us. they were more interesting than the candidates. 

let's look at what you did with it. here we have a cartoon. this is the doles in bed. mrs. dole is completely dressed, and she's speaking into a microphone, and the senator is saying, "give it a rest, liddy." 

yeah. this is right after the convention. 

before we go on, let me just look at one more, and then we'll talk about him. here we have the clintons in bed, and the president looks kind of like franklin delano roosevelt, and mrs. clinton is saying, "eleanor says to knock it off, bill." let's start with that one. tell us about that one. 

well, you know, first of all, you always want to draw the candidates in bed, whenever possible. there's a rule for political cartoons; that it humanizes them, or you know, in the bathroom, any of the human parts of the house. but, you know, with hillary saying, "eleanor says to knock it off, bill," that was after the election, and clinton had won, was looking like roosevelt, and this whole thing fascinated me of hillary clinton becoming this new age, talking to eleanor roosevelt, and i couldn't help but associate to nancy reagan, who is another one of the kind of rigid seeming, you know, dominatrix kinds of first ladies who always seem to have these weird fascinations with the occult and with, you know, star gazing and astrology or--you know, i enjoyed going at something from the side of pulling out an old issue and bringing it up. but having the wives of both candidates were really interesting. as a matter of fact, what i found most interesting was how clinton, the genius of this election, and the victory this year was of clinton finding hillary to carry his problems with whitewater and then dick morris to carry that, you know, that kind of part of him that is more-- how would we say--promiscuous part of the president. and so he found designated, you know, problem folks who served as lightning rods, so he kind of got off the radar, and these people were seen that way. i did a drawing after the morris thing where clinton is saying, you know, "imagine my surprise when it wasn't me." [laughing] 

before we go on to your cartoon, steve kelley, this idea of putting the candidates in bed or in some intimate kind of setting, does everybody find that that's funny, or is this just your own peculiar-- 

you know, basically we tend to idealize candidates and presidents, and part of the role of the cartoonist is to humanize. 

do you agree with that? 

in addition, one of the few true advantages that political cartoonists have over say photographers or columnists is that they "can" put the candidates in bed. i mean, no photographer could go in and snap a picture, a columnist might describe it, but not nearly as well. i mean, we can depict the president or first lady in bed, if we want, and i think that alone is--it just startles the reader, and it's interesting just to see what someone- -how someone would conceive it. 

it's very startling, i agree. yes, go ahead. 

our job as editorial cartoonists is really to point out that politicians are fallible, that they do make mistakes. i think it was kind of interesting that doug had fdr there. i think the social security outlays that they predicted in 1980 were $1.3 billion. they missed it by $290 billion. so we get to put em in a situation where they might not be to show the people that they're more human, the politicians are more human, and that they are fallible. and that's the whole point of editorial cartooning. 

steve, sticking with the elections, looking back, the scandals gave you quite a bit of fodder. 

well, the trouble was keeping up with the scandals. i mean, especially in the white house, i mean it seemed that they came virtually every week. and it was almost-- 

excuse me one second. let's look at this cartoon. here we have the white house with the sign outside that's sort of like the sign outside a bank. it says, "time 1:17, temperature 85 degrees, current scandal fbi files." 

right. that was just the current scandal. i mean, that was the fourth in a long series of scandals. and, you know, this was--it was almost like a shell game that the white house, or it seemed like that, like they were trying to--okay, well, everybody is talking about this scandal. now, quick, start another fire over here, and let's--we'll get em talking about that, and before they can really get any meat there, then we'll send them over to another one over here. it was--you know, and also very good fodder for, for cartoonists, just, you know, any presidential scandal at all is great, but to have, you know, to have a six-pack is, it was nice. 

okay. let's look at four cartoons now on other issues, and we're going to go through these one at a time. here's steve kelley's take on roberto alomar, the baltimore oriole's player who spit on an umpire, and there's the umpire in his deep sea diving gear. and next, we see an ann telnaes cartoon on the first lady. there's the elephant, sitting and reading a bedtime story. he says, "and the bad, uppity woman was forced to leave washington in disgrace, while the angry white males breathed a sigh of relief and lived happily ever after." and the males in bed are saying, "read it again. read it again." and next, we have a doug marlette cartoon. this is about drugs and the baby boomers: "my folks warned me about the dangers of drugs, but they may have been having an acid flashback at the time." and then finally, we have a michael ramirez cartoon about violence on tv: the mother's saying, "son, your father and i have decided not to let you watch tv anymore because it promotes violence." and the son's saying, "touch my remote and i'll kill you." michael ramirez, how did you- -what made you decide to do that cartoon? what does it? what comes to your mind? 

well, you know, it's the irony in daily life that i think makes the best cartoons. in this case, you know, obviously parental guidance is well and good in making sure that your kids are watching what they're supposed to be watching, but does television violence really affect our children? and i think the question was answered obviously by the kid exhibiting violent behavior. and i think those kind of ironies in real life, they tend to be great editorial cartoons. 

is that what moves you too, ann, those ironies? 

yes. it's usually something i've been thinking about, something that i've been thinking about for a while. and somebody will, you know, say something or have a press conference that just sounds so absurd to me that i just have to do a cartoon that minute. and the one that you showed, you know, that was a result of the fact that sen. d'amato had just finished the whitewater hearings, and they had called a press conference, and it just seemed so absurd to me. they had all these white men standing up there, all these republican white men, and each one took their turns in bashing hillary basically, and, you know, you just, you feel compelled to do a cartoon about it. and you want to show them in the most ridiculous light possible. 

is that the way it works for you, or do you have a different inspiration process? 

you know, i think it's just, you feel these contradictions, you know, and showing them the cartoon about the baby boomer, the children of the baby boomers talking about drugs, we live in such a "feel good" culture, and it's drug-oriented, and approaching--you know, now baby boomers are dealing with their children--you know, "did you do drugs, daddy," you know, "what was it like at woodstock?"--having to deal with that, and i could have done a cartoon saying--i could have done the same drawing and had the--had the kid saying, you know, my parents warned me about drugs, but i don't know if it was them or the prozac talking. [laughter among group] 

and steve kelley, what about the alomar cartoon, did you do that right away after the spitting incident occurred, or did you think about it for a while? 

well, it ran a couple of days afterwards. what i try to do is determine essentially what people are talking about at lunch that day and let that be sort of my guide for what i address, and the great thing about that is people actually are looking for a cartoon on the subject. i mean, i'll many times have people say to me, i was wondering what you were going to do about this event. and like with the alomar event, it was so out of the ordinary that a professional baseball player would spit in the face of an umpire, of authority. and so everyone was focused on that, so any cartoon that i drew about it not only was going to receive a lot of readers, a lot of people were going to look at it, but they were expecting it. they wanted to know what i was going to say about that, and when the cartoon came out, i got a lot of phone calls on it, people who were very happy about it. 

and then again we can't in television or print journalists can't talk about the umpire, you know, putting him in some kind of a deep sea outfit. 

well, once again, it gets back to the strength of political cartooning, which is you can create something that could never appear in physical life really. no photographer could have taken a picture of that. it was purely a cartoonist's creation. 

and there's also an element--and this is the art of cartoons i think--is that if you can hit like with a certain inevitability where a cartoon is so natural that people feel like, of course, and you're saying it for them, that's what you're kind of looking for. it's harder--it's hard to find those ideas, but that's what you're really after, like a hole in one. 

ann, which of your cartoons was the most controversial? and by that, i mean which one inspired the most reaction, letters, outcry? 

it was the working woman holding the fan, and it was making the mud go back on the hillary bashers. 

we're looking at it right now, and you can see the woman is labeled "working woman." 

right. i put my e-mail address on my cartoons, and i get a lot of reactions that way. and that cartoon, that got, you know, a very pro and con reaction. i mean, some people were like, good for you, you know, we're so tired of this bashing, and the other side, you know, i had people writing in, you know, we bash hillary because she's a liar and proceeded to call her many, many names and proceeded to call me many names, and it created quite a response. 

which was your most controversial cartoon? 

anything that i do on the o.j. simpson trial seems to be--seems to get me a lot of mail. i did one of simpson as a pilgrim. and this was if o.j. had been a pilgrim, and he's saying, i didn't do it. you know, people always, they call up and they're angry that you're second-guessing the work of a jury. they say, you know, i guess you think you know better than these 12 people, and i typically go, yeah, as a matter of fact, i think i probably do. [laughter among group] 

do you all like it when you get these kind of responses? i mean, do you like it when do one that gets lots of mail? 

yes, certainly. 

yeah. 

that's a sign you've been very successful. 

absolutely. 

yeah. and to the meaner the responses. 

you know, it's easy to do that. you can get response. but getting response when people--when you placed it where you want it, like a good tennis serve--and getting the reaction, that means you're being effective. 

michael ramirez, which was your most controversial cartoon? 

my most controversial one this year was i had a piano with the keys separated. i had the black keys on one side and the white keys on the other side. it was kind of an offshoot of the o.j. simpson trial, and sort of racial tension that's evolved in america. and it was titled "playing the blues," and it sort of talks about the resegregationist movement that we have, kind of multiculturalism versus fractionalization. you know, getting back to-- 

excuse me just one second. why do you think this one elicited so much response? why was it your most controversial? 

well, you know, being in memphis, tennessee, politics is very volatile to begin with, but thenwhen you get the racial element into any equation, it becomes much more so. so any time you start raising the issue of race, it seems to drive the telephones and bring in the hate mail. and in this case, it's an area of sensitivity in our community because of course dr. martin luther king was assassinated in memphis, and so any derivative subject in race will bring a lot of criticism. 

and i interrupted you. you wanted to say something else. 

you know, editorial cartoons are sort of a mirror of events, though. i mean, we're pretty much, you know, politics by its nature is very volatile. so, the hate mail that we get, we wear em sort of like medals, you know. if we do generate hate mail, if we're getting criticism, if we're getting phone calls, then we're doing our job. 

what was your most controversial cartoon, doug? 

you know, i had no controversial cartoons this year. i had had so many before this year that i got the year off. but i thought when you were going to ask us what was the most controversial subject or topic, which was for me, was who was the father of madonna's child, that was the controversy that riveted me. and the second thing was, who was the father of michael jackson's child? 

but you did also do a cartoon on race, did you not? 

yes, i did. 

that elicited a lot of response. 

yes. 

describe it. i think we can see it now. 

this actually got a positive reaction, as opposed to the-- 

you can see the church burning and it's, "in my day they just burned the cross." 

right. i got a lot of positive reaction, actually, on this cartoon, and this always surprises me. you never know. you get used to hate mail and petitions that you be fired and, you know, but sometimes things hit, and you can get positive reaction. 

it's interesting. 

you never know. and it's always interesting. 

is that true for all of you, you just can't predict it? 

no. you can't. and when you don't get a reaction, then you're kind of i guess it really didn't generate any discussion, so, yeah, you want that reaction. 

steve, what are you sharpening your quill for, thinking of next year? against whom are you sharpening your quill? 

it's interesting. every time i take a vacation from work--i took off a week for christmas, and inevitably, some big news event--you just wait for that. it's one of the laws of the cartoonists' universe. and i guess newt gingrich's mea culpa will eventually, i will be drawing cartoons about that and certainly about the second term, the clinton second term, and i guess the line-item veto is now going to--that will be a different spin on the budget process. 

how about you? 

whenever there are subpoenas in the air, you know, you know it's going to be a good time for cartoonists. but, you know, we all set our--as a matter of fact, we watch for when steve is going to go on vacation because we know that a big topic is coming-- [laughter among group]--is coming down the pike. 

ann, what about you? what are you thinking about for next year? 

probably china, china and hong kong i think i'm going to be doing a lot of cartoons. i try to do them now, but i think the editors will be wanting them this year, and also, well, thescandals, that'll be nice. that will be something good. 

and michael ramirez, briefly. 

well, i think, you know, the clinton administration is going to be a lovely topic of conversation for years to come. when i went to vote for him, i couldn't decide whether to vote for national security or job security. and i'm sure in the next year they're going to provide lots of cartoon fodder. 

well, thank you all very much. we'll look forward to seeing your cartoons next year. and thank you for being with us. happy new year! essay - strike a pose 

finally tonight essayist richard rodriguez, editor of the "pacific news service," has some thoughts about a new movie and its star. 

"eva, eva," chanted the crowd. eva peron was for a time in the 40's and 50's the first lady of argentina, the most famous woman of her time. forty years later "evita" is a movie starring madonna, the first lady of american rock. the american rock star and the argentine populist heroine, both lives are linked by odd similarities. eva peron was born marie eva duarte, the illegitimate daughter of a seamstress and a rancher in rural argentina. at 15, eva duarte traveled alone to buenos aires, there to begin an undistinguished career as an actress and singer. when she met juan peron in a night club, he was twice her age, an army colonel with an admiration for franco and hitler. madonna is a celebrity, famous not so much for her singing voice or her acting talent as for her ability to keep modeling and remodeling herself. she has become a female icon for a fierce determination to keep changing. look at the crowds that come to see her perform. crowds at rock concerts now are the most extraordinary crowds in the world. politicians all over must look at such audiences with envy. what politician in the world today can command this sort of audience? eva peron knew such crowds. fifty years ago, argentina was hers. argentine has always struck me as a country in search of a nation. in the 19th century european settlers wiped out nearly all trace of the indian from the land. even luis borges, argentina's greatest writer of this century, blind borges used to laugh at what he supposed was the indians' backwardness. such a sad land. for most of the century argentina has flirted with strong men at the left and the right. lacing a democratic tradition, argentina was readily romanced by a strong man's promise of order, "orden," that most luxuriant of words in the political lexicon of latin american spanish. whereas, rock music is america's hymn to disorder, rock is democracy on speed, do your own thing. to that extent rock music is anti-political and necessarily skeptical of the established order. when elvis presley visited richard nixon's white house, the two men seemed from different planets. rock music is less about saying something than about unsaying it. country music, by contrast, even thuggish rap music communicate with narrative. the most interesting idea i've ever heard madonna express was a necessity of striking a pose. eva peron became a genuine populist heroin. she was of the poor, and they, she grandly insisted, were of her. she had no ideas. she had only a set of sentimental speeches everyone had heard several times. while juan peron arrested journalists and political rivals, eva became a political heroine whose fame derived from dying her hair blond and wearing christian dior. with a beautician's help and a hairdresser's skill, evita was a golden fairy godmother to a yearning argentina. 

in buenos aires, as in every town and village throughout argentina, there is mourning for the first lady of the land, eva peron. 

she died young, at 33, from uterine cancer. in death, eva peron became a saintly relic. 

i am only a simple woman. 

in the 1970's, eva was resurrected as "evita," a pop opera by andrew lloyd weber, which is where we find her now, "evita," the movie, played by madonna, the rock singer whose most astonishing achievement is reinventing herself. in early december bloomingdale's opened evita boutiques in all of its department stores. here, you could buy evita lipstick, dresses, jewelry, all to create "the look." 

"don't cry for me, argentina." 

perhaps because of the restrictions women have lived with for centuries it would necessarily occur to a woman to realize the importance of costume and image. and yet, there is something very terrible and very modern about the bottle-blond fame of eva peron and madonna. it is possible now in our celebrity- obsessed world to become very influential by merely striking a pose. 

"don't cry for me, argentina." 

i'm richard rodriguez. recap 

again, the major stories of this holiday, the terrorists holding hostages in lima, peru, released seven more this evening. no explanation was given for the release. an israeli soldier fired at shoppers in an arab market in hebron, wounding five people. he said he wanted to sabotage the handover of hebron to the palestinians. and a powerful new year's day storm hit washington, oregon, and northern california. heavy rains and high winds caused flooding, mud slides, and power outages. we'll see you online and again here tomorrow evening. i'm jim lehrer. thank you, good night, and happy new year.
